REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY 14. MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY 14.01 Regional Overview The Region has a small but well established industrial base consistingof manufacturing, processing, and service industries, which range from traditional industries servicing agricultureandsawmilling,todynamicindustries inhightechnology. Over 60% of the Region's industrial establishments are located in the Lilydale area. With most of the activity concentrated in Kilsyth, Lilydale and Chirnside Park. These areas also have the largest amount of vacant industrial land, most of which however, is committedfordevelopment intheshort tomedium term. There are limited numbers of, and opportunities for, industrial establishments in Healesville,Woori YallockandWesburn(whichis partiallydeveloped). Traditionally, manufacturing industries have been regarded as a non-desirable activityin the Region. This perception, however is gradually changing for manyindustries, which through the use of high technology, sensitive designs and siting, have acquired alevel of public acceptance. It is important therefore that anynew industries to be attracted to the Region exhibit a high level of community acceptance, achieve compatibility with the environment andmaintenanceofamenity. The Regional Strategy Plan promotes the need to develop a sustainable economy. Support needs to be given to the maintenance and growth of local enterprises within the agricultural, commercial, tourism and industrial areas, provided they are ecologically sustainable; maintain local amenity; and are accepted by the community at large as contributingtowards animprovement inlifestyles fortheRegion's residents. Despite the employment opportunities available within the Region, the outer eastern suburbs of Melbourne will continue to provide the major employment source for the Region’s residents. However, growth in employment will be closely linked to the changes occurringthroughtheincreasedprovisionoftertiaryeducationintheRegion. 14.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the manufacturing and industry policies is to control and coordinate the provision of land for industry, whilst providing for an increase in employment opportunities for local communities. At the same time it is intended to control the nature and scale of development so that environmental values such as flora, fauna, water quality and yields, air quality and landscape values are not adversely affected,andthat theresidential amenityoftheareais maintained. 14.03 Existing industrial zones Industrywill be encouraged to locateinexistingIndustrial Zones and,wherepossible,to makemoreefficient useofvacant andpartlydevelopedland. In providing for industrial or manufacturing uses and development, planning authorities must ensurethat: 61. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY  areticulatedsewerageandwatersupplyis available;  appropriate off-street parking, vehicular access and loading facilities are provided;  the siting, design and appearance of buildings have minimal adverse impact on thesurroundinglandscape;  all liquid and other wastes will be disposed of in an appropriate manner, and noise minimised, in accordance with the requirements of the Environment ProtectionAuthority,toensuretheprotectionoftheamenityofthearea;  the safetyand amenityof residential areas near an industrial use are protected by controllingheavytrucktraffic;  where applicable, large storage areas are separated from residential areas and screenedfrom publicview;  wherever possible, industrial uses are grouped to ensure the economical provision,extensionandmaintenanceofutilities, and  adequate provision is made for the landscaping of site and that appropriate controls are put in place to cover maximum building site coverage, and appropriateset backs toensureadequatelandscapingofsite. 14.04 Additional land for industry Additional land for industry may be provided in appropriate areas in the Region in accordance with performance standards. Prior to land being rezoned for industrial or manufacturinguses, it must bedemonstratedthat:  there is a need for such land in the area, and that the land proposed to be rezoned is both suitable and capable of supporting the industrial and/or manufacturing uses sought;  therearenophysical and/orenvironmental constraints affectingtheland;  noiseandodourdischarges will becontrolled,toprotect theamenityofadjoining areas, particularly any nearby residential areas, in accordance with standards approvedbytheE.P.A.  the rezoning will not have adverse effect on the Region's environmental values, includinglandscape,flora,fauna,water,andairquality;  the rezoning will not have an adverse effect on the Region's agriculture, tourism, andrecreational activities, oronroads orresidential amenity;  the land is located so that it can be serviced by a major access route and that therewill benoadverseimpacts onsurroundingroads;  asuitablebufferfrom residential development canbeprovided,and  there is adequate provision of essential services and suitable provision for treatment of solid and liquid wastes and disposal of effluent, preferably through theprovisionofreticulatedliquidwastedisposal facilities. 14.05 Saw Mills 62. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY New sawmills may be allowed in existing industrial zones or in appropriate zones withinRural PolicyAreas, providedthat it is demonstratedthat;  thesiteis suitableandcapableofsupportingsuchauseanddevelopment;  there are no physical or environmental constraints affecting the land on which thedevelopment andusewill occur;  detriment tothelandscapevalues oftheareawill beminimised;  thereis adequateprovisionofessential services;  noise and waste discharges to the environment are controlled and are in accordancewithstandards approvedbytheE.P.A.;  the land is not within an area subject to high bush fire danger and that appropriatemeasures forfirepreventionaretaken,and  the land is serviced with suitable vehicular access and the development will not causeadversetrafficimpacts onsurroundingroads. 14.06 Employment Issues In support of the primary purposes for these policies, consideration must be given not only to employment generation, but to servicing the educational and training needs of theRegion's residents. Ways inwhichthis canbeachievedinclude:  examining ways in which the employment base of the Region can be broadened, includingtertiaryemployment;  working with appropriate authorities to establish new employment initiatives which more adequatelyutilise the readysource of labour, particularlythe young, the unemployed and those on low incomes who have to commute long distances tofindemployment; and  working with appropriate educational bodies to ensure the development of a comprehensive range of training and retraining opportunities for the Region's workforce. 63.