Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Region Upper Yarra Valley & Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan AMENDMENT No. 122 This rewrite of the Regional Strategy Plan acknowledges the dissolution of the Upper Yarra Valley & Dandenong Ranges Authority, in June 1995, and of the restructure of Local Government boundaries that occurred in the Region in December 1994 OFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS Chapter Contents Page 1 PREFACE TO REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN 1 2. THE REGION AND ITS FUTURE 4 3. TOWNSHIP POLICY AREAS 8 4. LANDSCAPE LIVING POLICY AREAS 16 5. RURAL POLICY AREAS 24 6. PUBLIC LAND POLICIES 36 7. MANAGEMENT OF SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE 42 8. MANAGEMENT OF SITES OF CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE 46 9. PUFFING BILLY RAILWAY SCENIC CORRIDORS 47 10. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 49 11. SPECIAL STUDY AREAS 51 12. HUMAN SERVICES 53 13. ACTIVITY CENTRES 55 14. MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY 61 15. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, MINING & SOIL REMOVAL 64 16. RECREATION AND TOURISM 67 17. WATER RESOURCES 76 18. SERVICE NETWORKS 81 19. TRANSPORT 89 20. FIRE MANAGEMENT 96 Schedule 1 STATE PLANNING POLICY FOR THE REGION 99 Schedule 2 SITES OF CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE 105 Schedule 3 SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE 111 Schedule 4 LAND USE AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ROADS 119 Schedule 5 ENVIRONMENTAL WEEDS OF THE REGION 122 Schedule 6 EXEMPTIONS TO THE REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN 124 OFFICIAL REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PREFACE 1. PREFACE TO REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN 1.01 Purpose of the Regional Strategy Plan The purpose of the Regional Strategy Plan is to provide clear directions for the future allocation of public and private resources in the Region within a framework determined bythe Government, through its State Planning Policies for the Region. This will enable the needs of the local residents and visitors to be met, while ensuring that State and regional aims are satisfied. The Regional Strategy Plan provides the necessary links between broad Government policies and the more specific local planning controls of the Councils withintheRegion. The future role of the Regional Strategy plan is to ensure that planning in the Region continues to protect the special character and features of the Region in accordance with thePrinciples ofStatement ofPlanningPolicyNo3. TheRegional StrategyPlanapplies toall thelandwithintheShireofYarraRanges. 1.02 Background The Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Authority was established with the proclamation, in April 1977, of the Upper Yarra Valley &Dandenong Ranges Authority Act 1976. The Region for which the Authority was responsible comprised the former Shires ofHealesville,Lillydale,SherbrookeandUpperYarra. With local government restructure in December 1994, the Region generally covered the sameareaas themunicipal district oftheYarraRanges Shire. The object of the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Act was "to enable increased protection for the special features andcharacter of theRegion". TheAct also required that the Authorityprepare Regional StrategyPlans to implement amongst other things, State Planning Policies for the Region (in particular, the former Statement of PlanningPolicyNo.3,UpperYarraValleyandDandenongRanges, April 1979). The Regional Strategy Plan was prepared by the Authority having regard to the followingmatters (as outlinedinSection13ofits Act):  “The physical economic and social resources of the Region and the management anduseof suchresources.  The likelihood of development in the Region or use of land in the Region destroying or detrimentally affecting the features or character of the Region and methods by which such development or use of land could be regulated in order topreservesuchfeatures or character.  Whether provisionof publicservices andutilities withintheRegionareadequate and whether, and if so what, provisions should be made to meet future needs of thecommunity. 1. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PREFACE  Whether leisure and recreation facilities in the Region are adequate and in particular whether open spaces such as parks, playgrounds and sports grounds within the Region are or will be adequate to meet the future needs of persons living within the Region and persons coming to the Region for recreational purposes.  Planning schemes prepared by responsible authorities in the Region whether or not suchschemes areinforce.  Landuseandpotential landusewithintheRegion.  Whether any part of the Region should be redeveloped or renewed in order to rectify conditions of bad or unsatisfactory location or layout or unhealthy or obsoletedevelopment.  Whether the subdivision of any land within the Region should be prohibited regulatedor permittedonlysubject toconditions.  Any areas or buildings of historical or architectural interest, scientific interest, natural beauty or interest or of any other special significance which should be conservedor enhanced.  Any other matter which in the opinion of the Authority should be considered in order to ensure that the planning of the Region might proceed in the best interests of theresidents of theRegionandthecommunitygenerally.” The Authority was required to re-investigate the Region between four and six years following the approval of a Regional Strategy Plan. This occurred between 1987 and 1989, and resulted in the preparation and approval of a new Regional Strategy Plan (in theform ofAmendment 29). After the approval of the Regional Strategy Plan in 1982 the local sections of planning schemes within the Region have been progressively amended to make them consistent with the Regional Strategy Plan and to implement the policies contained within it. The future role of the Regional Strategy Plan is to ensure that there is a regional direction to planning in the Region and to provide a vehicle for implementation of State planning policies. On the 14th December 1994 the State Government repealed the Authority’s Act and set in motion a process to wind up the activities of the Authority. As a consequence of the Planning Authorities Repeal Act 1994, the Regional Strategy Plan came under the jurisdiction of the Minister for Planning. New provisions under the Planning and Environment Act 1987will provideanon-goingrolefortheRegional StrategyPlan,as a policy document setting ‘regional’ direction for local sections of planning schemes withintheRegion. 1.03 Implementation of the Regional Strategy Plan The Regional Strategy Plan, with the repeal of the Authority’s Act, is now prepared, amendedand administeredunderthePlanningandEnvironment Act. Section46Fofthe Planning and Environment Act requires that the Minister must not approve an amendment which is inconsistent with the Regional StrategyPlan. PlanningAuthorities 2. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PREFACE carrying out amendments to planning schemes must therefore ensure that the amendments are consistent with and implement the policies of the Regional Strategy Plan. Planning for all uses and developments in any policy area must reinforce the primary purposeoftheseareas. Section 46G of the Planning and Environment Act requires that no Government Department, Public Authority, or Council may carry out works or undertakings in the Region which are not in conformity with the Regional Strategy Plan. These works and undertakings must conform with the land management policies applying within the relevant policyarea. Referalso toPublicLandPolicyAreapolicies. 1.05 More Restrictive Controls In the event that special local circumstances require more restrictive land use, development or subdivision management controls, a planning authoritymayincorporate such provisions through amendments to its planning scheme, provided that there is no overall conflict withthepolicies andobjectives oftheRegional StrategyPlan. 1.06 Incremental Effects Planning authorities, in preparing amendments to the local sections of planning schemes, must ensure that the incremental effects of individual changes to land uses and developments achieve, or do not prejudice, the primary purposes and policies of the policyareas withinwhichtheyoccur. 1.07 Meaning of Words and Terms Words used in the Regional Strategy Plan have their common meaning, unless it is inconsistent with the context within which they are being used or unless they are otherwise defined in the Planning and Environment Act 1987, other relevant legislation orintheplanningschemes applyingintheRegion. . 3. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - THEREGIONANDITSFUTURE 2. THE REGION AND ITS FUTURE 2.01 Introduction The Regional StrategyPlan has been developed within the context of State policyand in the firm conviction that to retain the special features and character of the Region, active and positive planning is required. The Upper Yarra Valley and the Dandenong Ranges areanenvironmental precinct ofhighqualityrequiringsensitivepolicies andplanning. The dynamic nature of the Region's natural systems, and the requirements of the residents and visitors, must be recognised and balanced. This involves the specification of objectives for areas and activities, so that more detailed planning can occur within a framework which is acceptable for the preservation of the Region's natural features, and theenhancement ofthelifestyleofits residents andvisitors. 2.02 The importance of the Region The Region covers some 2500 square kilometres, between the eastern fringe of metropolitan Melbourne and the catchment of the Thompson River. The Region is important to Melbourne and Victoria because it provides water, agricultural and forest products, scenic landscapes, plant and animal communities, and an extensive range of recreational and tourism opportunities. ThemajorityoftheRegion's 135,000population valuelivingwithinits scenicandbushlandenvironment. The Region supplies about 80% of Melbourne's domestic water requirements, mostly from closedforest catchments intheupperreaches oftheYarraRiverandits tributaries. The Region is an important area for conservation, not only within a metropolitan, but also within a State and national context, as it contains a great diversity of vegetation types, landforms, land uses, and historic and scenic landscapes. These provide a wide range of habitats for birds, animals and plants (many of which are rare or endangered). Theyalso accommodatesites ofcultural,educational andrecreational value. Rural activities in the Region are important in the local and Victoria's economy. The Region accounts for over 30% of total Victorian establishments for nurseries, cut flowers and turf growing. Other products important in the Region’s economy include fruit and vegetables, cattle grazing and dairying. Rural activities which are establishing or expanding include cashmere goat and deer farming, production of exotic fruits such as nashi pears and chinese gooseberries (Kiwi Fruit), and the growing of peaches and nuts. An expanding wine industry reflects the historical reputation of the Yarra Valley as an ideal location for cool climate vineyards and wineries. The Yarra Valley is quickly gainingrecognitionthroughout Australiaandoverseas forthequalityofits wines. The Region is a veryimportant tourist asset for Victoria. More than two millionpeople visit the Region each year, making a considerable contribution to the local and regional economy. This contribution will be significantlyincreased bythesensitiveexpansionof facilities, particularlyfortourist accommodation. 4. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - THEREGIONANDITSFUTURE Finally, the residents of the Region value a lifestyle which comes from living in an area less densely populated than metropolitan Melbourne, from a relationship to natural elements that cannot be easily obtained in the suburbs, from an ability to relate to a community of people at a scale where personal identity is facilitated, and from the opportunitytoenjoytheRegion's uniquecultureandtraditions. This Regional Strategy Plan is directed towards the enhancement of those conditions by which the local communities within the Region can thrive and prosper, and in so doing, fullyenjoythevalueoftheirnatural environment. 2.03 State Government Planning Policies for the Region The Victorian Government has formulated a number of strategic policies, some of which have particular relevance to the Region and its future. The Regional Strategy Plan, and the local section of planning schemes that implement it, must have regard to thesepolicies. The most relevant Government policyto the Region is the former Statement of Planning Policy No. 3 - Upper Yarra Valley & Dandenong Ranges Region, now expressed as StatePlanningPolicyfortheRegion. The policy aims to contain urban development to a level compatible with conservation of the Region's rich environmental features and with its high standards of amenity. The Regional Strategy Plan is directed towards defining, in a very positive manner, boundaries and principles upon which containment is to be handled. It includes specific policies which deal withthetransitionbetweentheRegionandmetropolitanMelbourne. 2.04 Land Conservation Council Recognition must be given to the recommendations of the Land Conservation Council, that have been adopted by Government, particularly in its review of the Melbourne Area, District 2, which covers all areas of Public Land within the Region. The Land Conservation Council recommendations, once adopted by the State Government, will specifytherangeoflanduses forPublicLandwithintheRegion. 2.05 Pressures faced by the Region The Region is facing increasing pressures from a number of directions. There is the pressure resulting from metropolitan Melbourne's urban growth to consume more and more valuable agricultural and environmentally sensitive land for housing and urban infrastructure. There is pressure to maintain the viability of agricultural pursuits, be they intensive cropping,broadscalegrazing,mixedand/orpart-timefarming. There are also economic pressures for the Region to protect itself from external and world market fluctuations, and from government economic policy changes, whilst seeking new opportunities for employment, education, recreation, leisure, artistic and cultural development,andtourism. Finally, there is pressure to maintain and protect the Region's unique and scenic landscape features. Its flora and fauna, soil and water resources are constantly under threat from increasinghumanactivities. 5. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - THEREGIONANDITSFUTURE Whilst change is inevitable, it is important that change is managed in a way that will enhance the Region's desirable features. The challenge is to achieve a balance between protecting its natural environmental values and amenity, and developing a comprehensive economic and social infrastructure to adequately service the current and futureneeds oftheRegion's residents andvisitors. This challenge will intensifyin future years as new elements and factors are expected to come into effect. These include such items as an aging of the population, increased leisure time of the workforce, an increase in the environmental awareness of the population, a change in employment patterns and family/household composition, and a need for regions to be more self-reliant as necessary structural changes in the State and national economytakeeffect. 2.06 Vision for the Future Among the most outstanding features of the Region are the beautyof its landscapes and the intrinsic value of its remnant vegetation. The recognition of these assets is onlyone step towards their preservation. In order to protect such valuable resources, certain land uses will remain strictly controlled, and appropriate land management practises will be maintainedtoensurethat theirqualityremains unspoiled. If the Region is to establish itself as a sustainable community in economic, social and environmental terms, a number of directions need to be clarified, programs implemented,andsomeinitiatives undertaken. For the Region to develop a sustainable economy in the short to medium term, support will be given to the establishment, maintenance and growth of new local enterprises, thereby expanding employment opportunities for the Region's workforce, and reducing travellingtimeandcosts forresidents havingtofindsuchopportunities elsewhere. New and expanded tourism facilities will also be an important contribution to this objective. Opportunities for supporting and expanding (where appropriate) the agricultural baseoftheRegionwill also besupported. As part of an overall economic and social development strategy, the establishment of adequate tertiaryeducation opportunities will be encouraged so as to stop the leakage of secondary school graduates (and hence future skilled workforce) from the Region, and to provide new avenues for the Region's workforce to increase and/or diversify their skills. Government Departments, Public Authorities and community groups will be consulted in order to assess the strategic implications of regional land use planning strategies on the provision of physical, transport and human services, and to assist the adequate and equitabledistributionofsuchservices andresources availabletothe Region's residents. 6. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - THEREGIONANDITSFUTURE Finally, in order to maintain control over the way development impacts on the Region's environment, and to assist the provision of anappropriaterangeofservices andfacilities for the Region's residents, a limit to the size of the Region's urban and other residential areas will be set at a level where no further residential development can take place beyondthat whichis providedforintheRegional StrategyPlan. . 7. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS 3. TOWNSHIP POLICY AREAS POLICY AREAS 3.01 Regional Overview - Township Policy Areas Townships and urban areas comprise about three percent of the Region's area, although theyhouse most of its residents. While the rural and public land areas of the Region are often the main attractions for visitors, the township areas generally provide the necessaryinfrastructurefortheirphysical needs, as well as fortheneeds ofresidents. The Region's major populated areas are adjacent to its western boundary, and include Lilydale, the predominantly metropolitan urban areas of Chirnside Park, Mooroolbark and Kilsyth and the residential corridor between Upper Ferntree Gully and Belgrave. Other residential concentrations occur in separate townships, such as Healesville, Yarra Glen,Woori Yallock,YarraJunction,WarburtonandMonbulk. Without sensitive planning, the demands for residential land threaten some of the special characteristics which make the Region so attractive. For this reason, State planning policy for the Region specifically identifies the need for limiting the extent of urban development andtocontainsuchdevelopment toascaleandtypecompatiblewith theconservationofnatural resources andresidential amenity. It also stipulates that: "Any net increase in the total provision for residential development in the Policy Area shall be contained within the aims of this Policy. There shall be no net increase in the total provision for residential development in the Dandenong Ranges; and no significant increase in the Yarra Valley and the southern foothills beyond that provided for in proposals approved or exhibited at the date of adoptionof this Policy". The Regional StrategyPlan specifies that there will be onlylimited township expansion. The Region, however must provide opportunities for the enhancement of living for existing communities, and must ensure that facilities and services are available and appropriate to the nature of the communities and to their location on the fringe of metropolitan Melbourne. Township policies have been developed to ensure efficient use of the existing infrastructure such as roads, railways, sewerage, water supply systems and human services. The policies will also assist to conserve the Region's natural resources, protect the amenity of the Region's residents and provide opportunities for a variety of lifestyles. Melbourne2030Urban Growth Boundary TheStateGovernment’s strategyformetropolitanMelbourne,“Melbourne2030”was releasedonthe8October2002. TheStrategycontains directions andpolicies that apply anUrbanGrowthBoundarytometropolitanMelbourneandtoanumberofrural townships, includingurbanareas withintheUpperYarraValleyandDandenongRanges region,toprevent theencroachment ofurbandevelopment intoGreenWedgeareas. Within the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges region, the Urban Growth Boundary generally conforms to the Township Policy Areas in the Upper Yarra Valley 8. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan. The Urban Growth Boundary also includes established areas that have the urban characteristics of Township Policy Areas but havenot previouslybeenincludedwithinsuchpolicyareas. Township Policy Areas 3.02 Overview These policy areas are clearly urban in character. Many possess a wide range of facilities, infrastructure and community services typical of townships. While many of the characteristics of the area are special, in that they are located in the Upper Yarra ValleyandtheDandenongRanges, thegeneral characteris that ofabuilt environment. Parts of the Township Policy Areas have other elements which suggest the need for particular care, to address unique circumstances, such as lack of infrastructure services or environmental limitations to development. Other areas may possess a high standard of residential amenity, Sites of Natural or Cultural Significance or be areas with high landscapequalities, substantial remnant treecoverorexcessiveslopes orarefloodprone. For those parts of the Region within the direct influence of the metropolitan area, there are considerations which need to be addressed through policies that reflect that influence. This is most apparent in the western parts of Mooroolbark, Kilsyth and ChirnsidePark. The extent and location of Township Policy Areas (shown as Township A and Township B) are shown on Map Series 1. AlthoughshownontheMaps, thedistinction betweenthesepolicyareas is nolongerappliedintheRegional StrategyPlanpolicies. Township PolicyAreas include all land shown in the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme as beingwithintheUrbanGrowthBoundary. Township Policy Areas 3.03 Regional Goals Theregional goals forTownshipPolicyAreas areto:  maintain and enhance the character and environmental quality of townships, protect sites of significance, and control development where land is subject to environmental constraints orcannot besatisfactorilyserviced;  ensure that planning meets community needs, and to provide opportunities for a varietyoflifestyles;  ensure that urban development is contained within the designated Township PolicyAreas;  ensure that where appropriate the utilisation of existing physical and human services is efficient and that provision of new services is adequate and appropriate. 3.04 Primary Purpose TheprimarypurposeoftheTownshipPolicyAreas is to: 9. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS  containdevelopment withinidentifiedareas;  ensure that new development in townships is compatible with the special characteristics oftheseareas; and  ensure that any development takes into account environmental and servicing constraints andtheneedtomaintainthequalityoflifeofresidents. In areas not identified as having environmental or infrastructure constraints, provision canbemadeforadiversityofdevelopment,includingamorevariedhousingstock. 3.05 Regional Objectives Regional objectives forTownshipPolicyAreas areto:  allow a broad range of urban land uses, including residential, industrial, retail, commercial, institutional and public purposes, in larger townships in a manner whichis compatiblewiththeenvironment;  restrict development on land that is subject to environmental constraints and which cannot be satisfactorily serviced, and to ensure that where reticulated sewerage is not available, sites are capable of on-site treatment and disposal of all wastewaters generated;  facilitate the development of strong communities adequately provided with an appropriate range of services in settings conducive to the attainment of quality lifestyles;  allow for the provision of a diversity of residential accommodation in suitable areas andaccordingtoappropriateperformancestandards;  ensureefficient utilisationofexistingreticulatedandcommunityservices;  maintain environmental quality, residential amenity and to promote good townshipdesign; and  protect Sites ofNatural andCultural Significance. 3.06 Nature of development Planning authorities may provide for a diverse range of housing, of varying densities andlot sizes inarangeoflocations throughout theTownshipPolicyAreas. This maybe achieved byallowing for a range of lot sizes and multi-unit development in appropriate township locations, where township design criteria and housing density provisions can be applied to protect residential amenity and where efficient use of townshipinfrastructurecanbemade. 3.07 Policies for development in Township Policy Areas WithinTownshipPolicyAreas thefollowingdevelopment policies must beapplied:  The privacy, health, safety, amenity and convenience of residents must be assured.  Development in those parts of Township Policy Areas that have identified high environmental, landscapeor‘natural’values and/orresidential amenity,orwhich are subject to infrastructure or development constraints (such as excessive 10. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS slopes, landslip/instability problems, flood prone, fire hazards or the like) must beprotectedfrom inappropriateresidential orotherurbandevelopment.  Within these areas development must generally be limited to only one dwelling per lot, except for units for dependent/aged persons or the number of houses would not exceed the density of development allowed through subdivision provisions forthezonewithinwhichthelandis situated.  Minimum lot size for subdivision should be established on the basis of a size which could be expected to contain development in a manner compatible with the landscape character and environment of the locality, and which, in the absence of reticulated sewerage, would be capable of on-site treatment and disposal ofall wastewaters generatedonthat site.  Any special features of historical, architectural, cultural or other significance shouldbeidentifiedandmeasures implementedtomaintainandprotect them.  Measures should be implemented to ensure the retention of remnant vegetation, particularly indigenous vegetation and vegetation identified as being a Site of Natural Significance.  Thereshouldbepromotionofgoodtownscapedesign.  The environmental capacity of the land to properly accommodate uses and development is not exceeded 3.08 Minimisation of adverse impacts of development on the environment Development in Township Policy Areas must be precluded where the impact would result in significant damage to important environmental features. Any adverse environmental impact caused by the development of any land must be minimised by encouraging:  building designs which are compatible with the physical characteristics of the siteandthesurroundingarea;  protection of features such as buildings, trees, streetscapes, watercourses and areas of native and exotic vegetation which are important in the maintenance of thetownshipcharacterofthearea;  protection of areas of critical landscape sensitivity, including ridgelines and escarpments, and  conservation andprotectionofSites ofNatural andCultural Significance. 3.09 Lots suitable for construction of buildings Except as provided for by a Study Area provision, the construction of a building in a TownshipPolicyAreamaybeallowedonanylot,provided:  it is connected to reticulated sewerage or is capable of adequately treating and retainingall domesticwastewaterwithintheboundaries ofthelot; and  that any house or building requiring utility services is able to be provided with such services in a manner that will not have an adverse impact on the environment orlandscapeofthearea. 3.10 Construction of buildings on lots with steep slopes 11. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS The construction of a building must generally be confined to land which contains a slope of less than 20%. Where slopes are over 20% information must be provided to enable the minimisation of soil erosion, the protection or enhancement of landscape character and the avoidance of land instability, and to ensure that access to the building is locatedappropriately. 3.11 Control of buildings on land subject to environmental hazards The development of land subject to environmental hazards, including land instability, high fire risk and flooding, must bestrictlycontrolled,andmaybeallowedonlywhereit has been demonstrated that the building can be constructed in a manner that would not create danger to life and property, be of risk to the health and well being of the communityorcauseanysignificant environmental damage. 3.13 Maintenance of landscape character The landscape character of Township Policy Areas must be maintained and enhanced and all use and development must aim to protect important landscape features or viewpoints, and must consider factors such as site characteristics, views and visibility, vegetation retentionandestablishment,design,siting,siteworks andfireprotection. Any use or development of land within a landscape "classified" or "recorded" by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria), must be carried out in a manner that is compatible with the protection, maintenance and where possible, enhancement of the landscape character of these areas. Where appropriate, advice should be sought from the National Trust of Australia (Victoria) when assessing proposed uses and developments in"classified"or"recorded"landscapes. 3.14 Subdivision management for Township Policy Areas - Regional Objectives Theregional objectives forsubdivisionoflandwithinTownshipPolicyAreas areto:  Ensure that all subdivision is compatible with the special features and character oftheTownshipPolicyAreas.  Provide a range of lot sizes which allow for the creation of diverse and interestingtownshipareas andtoimprovehousingchoice.  Maintainenvironmental andlandscapequalities andresidential amenity.  Adequately control subdivision of land which is subject to environmental constraints and/orwhichcannot beadequatelyserviced.  Ensure the efficient utilisation of existing hydraulic and human services and the adequateprovisionofnewservices.  Protect Sites ofNatural Significanceand/orSites ofCultural Significance.  Ensure that subdivision is of a scale and in locations which will not generate traffic demands that would lower environmental amenity in the localityor in the Region. 12. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS 3.14 Subdivision Policies Subdivision, and the provision of utilityservices and works associated with subdivision, must achieve compatibility with the physical and landscape characteristics of the site/area,andmust becarriedout inamannerwhereby:  Each lot created will contain a development envelope which: wholly contains a slope less than 20%; is not affected by a floodplain management area, and can reasonably and safely be used for controlled and limited development, taking intoaccount therisk oflandinstability.  Each lot created is able to be connected to reticulated sewerage facilities, or where reticulated sewerage is not available, is capable of accommodating a satisfactory method of wastewater treatment and effluent disposal, which will ensure that the effluent can be contained within the curtilage of the lot (in compliance with requirements of the relevant State Environment Protection Policy).  Significant natural features, such as watercourses, fern gullies, rock outcrops and remnant native vegetation, will be protected in the design and development of anysubdivision.  A satisfactory program for the preservation and planting of native vegetation is incorporated in any new subdivision proposal, to ensure that development is not detrimental tothelandscapecharacterofthearea.  The subdivision is carried out in a manner which protects residential neighbourhoods from throughorheavyvehiculartraffic.  The provision of electricity, telephone or other telecommunicationlines, forboth reticulation within the area to be subdivided and for the supplyto each lot, must, beunderground,as aconditionofsubdivision. 3.15 Subdivision in the Puffing Billy Railway Primary Scenic Corridor Subdivision in the Puffing Billy Railway Primary Scenic Corridor must be prohibited except:  to allow for the subdivision of an approved building, as provided for by the SubdivisionAct 1989;  for a resubdivision where no additional lots will be created and there is no increaseinthenumberofhouses that maybeconstructed; or  where the subdivision is in accordance with a restructure program for a Special StudyArea. 3.16 Design of new township and residential areas The design of subdivisions, roads, facilities and utility services in newly developing areas, within Township Policy Areas, must provide for the maintenance of environmental values and must optimise the quality of life, safety and convenience of futureresidents. 13. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS Where substantial new subdivision and development is proposed in existing Township Policy Areas, planning authorities are encouraged to develop and implement a ‘local structureplan’,whichshouldinclude:  the location of major land uses, such as residential areas, commercial centres, schools andmajorareas ofpublicopenspace;  a hierarchy of access ways (for motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles) with clear distinctions between each type of access, based on function, physical and environmental characteristics of the area, amenity, safety, convenience and trafficvolumes;  an integrated roading access network linking lots to commercial and community centres, openspace,schools andotherfacilities;  the location of utility services in a manner that recognises the importance of remnant vegetation and other natural features, particularly within road reserves, including the location of shared utility trenches and the undergrounding of all electricity,telephoneandotherservices supplyandreticulation;  lots that have areas and dimensions which take into account the need for a variety of lot sizes, private open space, energy conservation, setbacks from roads, room forlandscaping,andadequatebuildingseparation,and  makingmaximum useofexistingfullyservicedareas. 3.17 Expansion of Healesville and Yarra Junction Townships The further expansion of the Healesville and Yarra Junction Townships mayonlyoccur whenit has beendemonstrated:  that thereis aneedforfurtherurbandevelopment intheseareas;  that the expansion areas, and the boundaries of land to be protected, are properly mapped, and that the means by which such protection will be achieved is detailed;  how the management of the ecological integrity of the area, including weed control, fire protection, drainage, and prevention of pollution of watercourses will beachieved;  how the retention of the areas of significant remnant vegetation will beachieved, including establishment of linkages to surrounding areas of vegetation; the establishment of substantial areas of tree canopy over service corridors and roads; and details of the means by which these linkages are to be maintained or achieved;  how all proposed development will be provided with reticulated sewerage and other essential services, such as water, roads, drainage and power (requiring that all electricity and telephone services are provided by the means of underground cables),includingdetails ofthelocation,kind,natureandtimingofsuch;;  how development will be made compatible with the protection and maintenance of the integrity of any Sites of Natural Significance, and of other native vegetation within and adjoining these areas, including the need to control (where necessary)thekeepingofdomesticpets; and 14. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TOWNSHIPPOLICYAREAS  that social and communitymatters including provision of services are addressed, andthemeans ofdeliveringtheservices areidentified. 3.18 Other policies applying to Township Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  PublicLand  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan. 15. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS 4. LANDSCAPE LIVING POLICY AREAS 4.01 Regional Overview The major concentrations of the land in these Policy Areas are in the Dandenong Ranges, around the township of Healesville and in a few areas along the Warburton Highway. They contain two broad categories of land. The first is the land which is already substantially subdivided and used predominantly for residential purposes, with some hobby farming activities. The second includes land which has been selected in strategic locations to provide a buffer between the urban areas of Lilydale and adjoining rural land, and to prevent further intrusion of incompatible activities into the rural environment. Landscape Living Policies have been applied to four policy areas, which comprise the land with similar physical and environmental characteristics, with a common element beinglowdensityresidential landuse. Melbourne2030Urban Growth Boundary The State Government’s strategy for metropolitan Melbourne, “Melbourne 2030” was released on the 8 October 2002. The Strategycontains directions and policies that apply an Urban Growth Boundary to metropolitan Melbourne and rural townships, including urban areas within the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges region, to prevent theencroachment ofurbandevelopment intoGreenWedgeareas. 4.02 Regional Goals Theregional goals fortheLandscapeLivingPolicyAreas areto:  Ensure that land within this zone remains committed to single detached housing as theprimaryfunctionofthesepolicyareas.  Minimise adverse visual and other impacts associated with the use and development oflandwithinthesepolicyareas.  Exclude commercial uses from the policy areas, other than those which can be appropriately integrated into the residential and environmentally sensitive nature ofthearea.  Ensure that uses and development which generate waste provide the means to treat and dispose of those wastes in a manner that has regard to recycling and to theirimpacts onthelandandtheareagenerally.  Providetheopportunityforlimitedunobtrusivetourist accommodation.  Maintain the distinct non-commercial areas between townships given the importance of retaining well defined and compact townships throughout the Shire.  Require the long term restructuring of land holdings within some of the existing subdivisions, where these areas are inappropriately subdivided having regard for local environmental,servicingandlandscapeconsiderations. 16. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  Ensure that all development has regard to the natural features of the land and is properly designed and sited in recognition of such factors as land slope, vegetationcharacteristics andotherlocal amenityconsiderations.  Ensure that development has regard to the built form and is designed and sited to maintain overall design consistency with surrounding development and without detriment tothelocal environment.  Provide for the long term protection and enhancement of remnant vegetation, particularlySites ofBotanical orZoological Significance.  Provide, in appropriate locations, for a buffer between urban development and the broadscale agricultural areas of the Region, particularly in the vicinity of Lilydale. 4.03 Landscape Living Policy Areas - Description and Primary Purposes Thelocationandextent ofLandscapeLivingPolicyAreas is shownon Map Series 1. Within the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges region, the Urban Growth Boundary generally conforms to the Township Policy Areas in the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan. The Urban Growth Boundary has also been applied to some Landscape Living Policy Areas that have urban characteristics. This includes the settlements of Wesburn, Millgrove and Launching Place. The inclusion of these areas within the Urban Growth Boundary recognises their urban characteristics but does not imply that their zoning should change under the Yarra Ranges PlanningScheme. Landscape Living 1 Policy Area Overview Most of the land in Landscape Living 1 Policy Area is in the Dandenong Ranges and in scattered localities in the southern foothills, generally following the Belgrave- Gembrookcorridor. The area is used predominantlyfor low-densityresidential living, recreation and tourism activities, together with associated retail and commercial uses, usually found in the hamlets scattered along the Mt. Dandenong Ridge. Generally, the land has alreadybeen subdivided, into lots varying in size from 0.1 hectare ‘suburban’ type lots, to lots of about 2hectares andlarger. The landscape of the Landscape Living Policy Areas is highly significant, with one of the important attributes beingthe presence of indigenous and exotic vegetation, with tall mountain ash trees being the major feature. Many residential properties, particularly those located on larger lots have well established and maintained gardens, which together with a "hills" and bushland environment makes this area one of the most desiredlow-densitylivinglocations withintheRegion. Primary purpose The primary purpose for the Landscape Living 1 Policy Areas is to maintain and where possible enhance indigenous and significant exotic vegetation and native fauna, special 17. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS landscape characteristics and the existing low density residential character, roads and otherinfrastructure. Landscape Living 2 Policy Area Overview These areas have been substantially or even completely subdivided and built upon, and have characteristics and densities similar to Township Policy Areas. They are excluded from Township PolicyAreas because of their limited size (which restricts their abilityto support township type services),and their separation or isolation from Township Policy Areas. This helps to avoid any expectations of a more complete range of services or of furtherurbanexpansionwhicha"Township"designationmight suggest. In these areas, any undeveloped land may be treated as Special Study Areas, to allow subdivision and/or management provisions which would have regard to their special circumstances. Primary purpose The primary purpose for the Landscape Living 2 Policy Areas is to maintain and where possible enhance the existing environment and landscape character of residential development. Landscape Living 3 Policy Areas Overview Most of the land in the Landscape Living 3 PolicyAreas is in Mt. Evelyn and the Narre WarrenEast area. The Policy Area generally contains land which is already substantially subdivided and used for residential purposes in a rural setting. The subdivision density is substantially lower than conventional urban areas, and residential use is usuallyassociated with small scale, part time, agriculture. The policyarea is generallyconfined to poorer agricultural land. Primary purpose The primarypurpose for the Landscape Living 3 PolicyAreas is to provide an attractive and low density living environment and to maintain and enhance the quality of its landscapeandenvironmental values andwatercourses. Landscape Living Buffer Policy Area Overview The Landscape Living Buffer Policy Areas provide a buffer between urban and rural areas to the north and west of Lilydale, to protect farming activities from incompatible urban land uses and prevent urban expansion into rural areas of the Yarra Valley. The land within this Policy Area is generally cleared of vegetation, with few constraints to low-densityresidential development. 18. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS Primary purpose The primary purpose of the Landscape Living Buffer Policy Area is to provide an attractive and well serviced rural-residential buffer between urban and rural land use in theLilydaleareaandtoprevent furtherintrusionofurbandevelopment intorural areas. Policies for Land Use and Management in Landscape Living Policy Areas 4.04 Land use Land uses must be compatible with the regional goals for Landscape Living Policy Areas andtheprimarypurposeforeachLandscapeLivingPolicyArea. 4.05 Construction of buildings The construction of buildings, including houses and farm buildings, in Landscape Living Policy Areas must be carried out in a manner compatible with the maintenance and protection of landscape character, water resources, indigenous and significant exotic flora, indigenous fauna, and the existing residential character, as providing acceptable standards ofresidential health,safetyandamenity. Development within Landscape Living Policy Areas may only occur on land (within a designateddevelopment envelope)which:  is not subject to excessive slopes (that is a slope greater than 20%), without proper regard being given to appropriate measures to ensure that soil erosion does not occur;  is not within a floodplain management area (except as allowed under Policy 10.02);  if subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybe used for controlled and limiteddevelopment;  is not within an area identified as having a high risk from wildfire, unless it has been shown that appropriate measures have been undertaken, to provide an acceptablelevel ofprotectiontothebuildingfrom wildfirerisk;  is of sufficient size, should there be no reticulated sewerage to which the building can be connected, to enable proper on-site treatment of all wastes generated in the building and the disposal on-site of the effluent from the treatment;  enables all buildings and their waste treatment and effluent disposal systems to be located at least 30 metres from any watercourse to avoid any adverse effects on water quality and streamside vegetation (this distance may be reduced to 10 metres where the land is too small to provide a 30 metre setback and the responsible authority is satisfied that the development and anywaste water from it will not adverselyeffect thewatercourse); (Am 75)  enables proper consideration to be given to the type of construction (external materials in particular) andthelocationofthebuildings andtheirancillaryworks (such as driveways and access roads), in a manner that avoids intrusion into the 19. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS surrounding landscape, and which provides opportunities for protecting remnant indigenous vegetationandnatural habitat; and  demonstrates that any house or building requiring utility services are able to be provided with such services in a manner that will not have an adverse impact on theenvironment orlandscapeofthearea. Except for the provision of a dependent relative unit, onlyone house maybe allowed on anylot ortenement holding(whereit applies). 20. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS 4.06 Tenement provisions Within Landscape Living 1 Policy Areas that are also within the Mt Dandenong Ridge Area, a tenement holding control must be introduced (or maintained) so that development of a house will only occur on a lot or parcel of land which satisfies one of thefollowing.Theland:  is part ofatenement holdingandis inexcess of0.4ha.inarea;  was created in accordance with an approved Planning Scheme or Interim Development Order;  consists of the consolidation of all parcels and/or lots within a tenement holding; or  is a lot which existed as a separate tenement holding on the date specified in the relevant planningscheme; 4.07 Tenement anomaly provisions Despite the requirement for tenement provisions, a planning scheme may modify the tenement provisions as theyapplytospecificlots, providedthat it is demonstratedthat:  The modification will not prejudicetheprimarypurposeofthepolicyareawithin which the lots occur and that the wider objectives of tenement controls for the policy area are protected from incremental erosion and are maintained as a legitimate means of protecting the areas identified from inappropriate development.  Services such as constructed roads, reticulated water supply and reticulated sewerage are available, without additional substantial costs to Council and servicing authorities and the provision of these and other utility services will haveminimal impact ontheenvironment orlandscapeofthearea.  Where reticulated sewerage is not available, the site must be of sufficient size to enableproperon-sitetreatment anddisposal ofall wastes.  Where the land is an area identified as having a high risk of wildfire hazard, appropriate building design measures will be required to be undertaken to provideanacceptablelevel ofprotection.  Development will not jeopardise the maintenance of any Site of Natural SignificanceorSiteofCultural significance.  There will be no detriment to the ecology of any stream or watercourse on or nearthesite,byvirtueoftheadditional development occurring.  The additional development can be considered to be infill in an area which is substantiallybuilt up.  The land is not subject to constraints to development, such as land instability, land liable to flooding or land with slopes of 20% or greater (unless where slopes are greater than 20%, information has been provided that demonstrates that soil erosion will be minimised, landscape characteristics are protected or enhanced and the development and access to it can be appropriately located and land instabilitywill beminimised). 21. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  Clearingofnativevegetationis minimised. 4.08 Landscape protection The protection, maintenance and enhancement of landscapes and landscape character in LandscapeLivingPolicyAreas must beensured. In the consideration, or carrying out, of any uses and developments, it must be ensured that:  visual and environmental values of landscapes in Landscape LivingPolicyAreas arefullyrecognised,protectedandwherenecessaryenhanced;  all development is located so that it avoids prominent ridgelines, hill tops and visuallyexposedvalleys;  consideration is given to the use of non reflective surfaces or screen planting, and that the development is adequately set back from road frontages and access ways;  all development is designed and sited in a manner complementaryto its location, and compatible with maintenance of character of the Landscape Living Policy Areas;  all roads and access tracks are located, designed, constructed and landscaped in the manner compatible with maintenance of landscape values and character, and minimisationofsoil erosion;  all land use and development is managedandcontrolledtomaintainandenhance the visual amenity and the quality along the main roads and other access routes, andthat ribbondevelopment alongtheroads is strictlycontrolled,and  all use and development of land within landscapes "Classified" and "Recorded" by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria) as delineated by Map Series 10, must be carried out in a manner that is compatible with protection, maintenance and,wherepossible,enhancement ofthelandscapecharacteroftheseareas. 4.09 Subdivision policies for Landscape Living Policy Areas Subdivision in Landscape Living Policy Areas must be managed in accordance with the PrimaryPurposeforeachPolicyArea. Within Landscape Living Policy Areas, subdivision may be allowed and planning schemes may provide for a variety of subdivision techniques, including minimum lot controls andadensitycontrol. 22. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS Subdivision yields The average yield of lots, and the maximum and minimum lot sizes, must conform to thefollowingtable: Minimum& PolicyArea Averagelotyield Maximumlotsizes 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving1 1ha-3ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving2 1ha-3ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 4ha LandscapeLiving3 3ha-7ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving(Buffer) 1ha-3ha ofsitearea Despitetheseprovisions, planningapproval maybegrantedforasubdivisionwhere:  The lot to be created is required for a public use or purpose by the Crown, a publicauthorityoraCouncil.  The purpose of the subdivision is to re-align a common boundary between two existing lots, where no additional lots will be created and where the re- alignment does not allow an increase in the number of houses that could be constructed on the land beyond that permitted by the planning scheme prior to thesubdivisiontakingplace.  The land is affected by Special Study Area or Restructure provisions and the subdivisionis inaccordancewiththerequirements ofthoseprovisions  The subdivision is for a multi-dwelling, shop, office, factory or other similar use,whichis inaccordancewithaplanningscheme. Subdivision management Any lot created by subdivision, (excluding lots created to provide for a Council, Public Authority or Government purpose) must comprise land which has at least 40% of its areathat is:  not subject toslopes of20%orgreater;  not withinafloodplainmanagement area; or  not subject to land instability, except where it can reasonably and safely be used forcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. The subdivision of land must only be allowed when the size, shape and layout of proposedlots arecompatiblewith:  the terrain characteristics of the site slope, watercourses, soil types and vegetation;  acontinuingpotential foranagricultural usetheland,whereappropriate;  thephysical landscapecharacteristics anduseofadjacent land; 23. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  the retention of remnant native vegetation and the long term conservation of anySites of Natural Significance and/or Sites of Cultural Significance affecting theland; and  the capacity of any land subject to land instability to be reasonably and safely usedforcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. In any subdivision, access roads and development envelopes must be located so that minimum earthworks are required, dominant landscape features such as ridgelines are free of development, and the maintenance of Sites of Natural Significance and Sites of Cultural Significanceis not jeopardised 4.10 Other policies applying to Landscape Living Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  PublicLand  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan. 24. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5. RURAL POLICY AREAS 5.01 Regional Overview The Rural Policy Areas in the Region cover approximately 890 square kilometres, which accounts for about 23% of the total land area in the Region. They include a variety of land forms, the major components of which being the foothills of the Dandenong Ranges and the valleys and surrounding foothills of the Yarra and Little YarraRivers andtheirtributaries. Rural Policy Areas support a wide variety of land uses, including intensive and broadscale agricultural activities, forestry, recreation and tourism and a varietyof ‘rural’ lifestyles, ranging from isolated farm houses to rural settlements. The major resources of these policy areas, apart from its people, are its climate, soils, water, flora and fauna andlandscapes. Rural landscapes are one of the Region's greatest attributes and assets. The combination of open valleys with rising foothills, framed by strong vertical elements of surrounding mountains and major ranges rising abruptly from the river flats, make this area one of themost attractiveandpleasant visual environments intheState. A combination of mild climate, high and well distributed rainfall and a variety of good soils has led to the establishment of many and varied agricultural activities, some of whichareofregional andStateimportance. There are persistent and often conflicting land use pressures and demands being placed on the natural resources of the Rural Policy Areas. Many past land use demands have resulted in dramatic modification of the natural environment. Current rural land use demands, if not managed and controlled sensitively, could result in further alienation of productive agricultural land and deterioration and/or loss of environmental and landscapevalues. Policies for Rural land based on further development and strengthening of the policies whichhavebeeninplacesincetheapproval oftheRegional StrategyPlanin1982. 5.02 Regional Goals and Objectives The regional goal for Rural Policy Areas is to ensure that rural land in the Region is protected and maintained for agricultural and rural activities and that rural landscapes are protected, maintained and where necessary improved, for the benefit of the present andfuturegenerations. 5.03 Regional Objectives Theregional objectives forRural PolicyAreas areto,whereappropriate,ensure:  the continuation of rural land uses primarilyforfarmingpurposes, andotheruses compatiblewithfarming; 24. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  the use and management of land in a manner that is sustainable and conducive to themaintenanceoffarmingoptions andopportunities inthefuture;  the protection and conservation of soils as an essential and irreplaceable natural resource;  the protection and management of native vegetation for its intrinsic values, as a fauna habitat and a valuable visual component of the rural landscape, and for its value for soil conservation, maintenance of water yields and quality and contributiontowards reducingtheGreenhouseEffect;  that all land use and development are compatible with the maintenance of rural landscapes, characterandatmosphere;  that all land use and management is carried out in a manner compatible with maintenance and improvement of water qualityand yields; and to ensure that the values identified on adjacent public and other land are not degraded by the off- siteeffects from rural land;  the protection, maintenance and enhancement of watercourses, wetlands, floodplains and drainage systems as essential components of water resource management andlandscapeandfaunal corridors as important aquatichabitat;  the rehabilitation of degraded watercourses and re-establishment of native riparianvegetationalongwatercourses andotherareas;  that the built environment, such as houses, buildings, structures, roads and other infrastructure, are sited and designed in a manner that complements the natural environment,and  the establishment of appropriate buffers between agricultural/rural and urban areas, to enable the exercising without conflict, of the right of farmers to farm theirland. 5.04 Rural Policy Areas - Description and Primary Purposes Thelocationandextent ofall Rural PolicyAreas is shownon Map Series 1. Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Areas Overview The Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Area covers the Silvan and Monbulk areas, and is used extensively for intensive agriculture and cropping, with the main activities being productionofcut flowers, nurserystock,vegetables, bulbs, fruit andberries. Rural residential and urban related demands are particularlystrongin this areaandifnot managedproperly,will continueas threats tothearea's agricultural productivity. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Areas is to protect, maintain and enhance the productive resources of the red soil areas, and to encourage its 25. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS use for intensive agricultural purposes, and where necessary to discourage the use of land for non agricultural purposes, while recognising the importance of the landscape values. Intensive Agricultural 2 Policy Areas Overview The Intensive Agricultural 2 Policy Area generally comprises red soil areas at Hoddles Creek. This Policy Area differs from Intensive Agriculture 1 through the productivity of soils being lower, because of generally lower natural fertility, shortages ofwaterinsomeareas andcolderclimates, resultinginashortergrowingseason. Berries and vegetables are the main crop, with some fruit production. In recent years the growingofgrapevines intheHoddles Creekareahas gainedsomeprominence. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Intensive Agriculture 2 Policy Area is to protect, maintain and enhance the red soil areas as a resource and to encourage the use of this land for broadscale intensive agricultural purposes, and where necessary, to discourage theuseoflandfornonagricultural purposes, whileprotectingthelandscapevalues. Rural 1 Policy Areas Overview The Rural 1 Policy Area covers an area constituting the major agricultural resource in the Region. This PolicyArea generallyfollows the valleys of the Yarra and Little Yarra Rivers andsomeoftheirtributaries. The predominant land use is grazing. Other agricultural and rural activities include mixed farming and some part time farming, with an increasing presence of more intensiveagricultural activities suchas fruit andvegetablegrowingandviticulture. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural 1 Policy Areas is to maintain and protect its soils and water resources for a variety of broadscale agricultural and rural activities, to control land use and land management activities in a manner conducive to the maintenance of landscape character, and to protect and enhance the remaining areas of nativevegetation,protect thenativefaunaandmaintainandimprovewaterquality. Rural 2 Policy Areas Overview The Rural 2 Policy Area covers an area generally located in the eastern parts of the Region, on more undulating and steeper slopes at higher altitudes. It has lower agricultural values than the Rural 1 Policy Areas. The predominant land use is grazing, withsomepart timefarmingandviticulture. Primary Purpose 26. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS The primary purpose of the Rural 2 Policy Areas is to maintain and protect its soil and water resources for a variety of broadscale agricultural and rural activities and to control land use and land management activities, in a manner conducive to maintenance of landscape character, to protect and enhance the remaining areas of native vegetation, protect thenativefauna,andmaintainandimprovewaterquality. Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area Overview The Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area generally comprises the land located between the Lysterfield Lake Park and Cardinia Reservoirandextendingnortheasterlytoincludethe rural portions ofMonbulkandtheeasternfoothills oftheDandenongRanges. Due to past subdivision of land in this area, the majorityof lots are in parcels of about 8 hectares. Soils are relatively poor, water scarce and the main agricultural activities are confined to part time farming, with some intensiveagricultural activities intheMonbulk area. The Policy Area contains some significant landscapes, such as the Cotswold Valleyand parts of Menzies Creek Valley, which are landscapes "classified" and "recorded" by the National Trust. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural Landscape 1 Policy Areas is toprovideforarange of farming uses and activities (including part time farming) compatible with land suitability, capability and subdivision patterns, to protect and maintain the remaining native vegetation, wildlife, water quality and to maintain and enhance landscape value andcharacter. Rural Landscape 2 Policy Area Overview The Rural Landscape 2 Policy Area includes land alongthe Yarra River and at Seville and in the Burleigh Hills, as well as small areas in the Macclesfield, Lysterfield and Monbulk areas. Main agricultural activities are grazing, mixed farming, part time farmingandinsomeareas, fruit andberryproduction. As in the Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area, the land in this Policy Area has been extensively subdivided. The lots however are generally larger than in Rural Landscape 1,withthemost commonsizebeingabout 16hectares. This Policy Area also contains significant landscapes, with areas such as Yellingbo Creek having National Trust "classified" status and the Menzies Creek having "recorded"status. 27. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural Landscape 2 Policy Areas is toprovideforarange of farming uses and activities (including part time farming) compatible with land suitability, capability and subdivision patterns, to protect and maintain the remaining native vegetation, wildlife, water quality and to maintain and enhance landscape value andcharacter. Rural Conservation Policy Areas Overview The Rural Conservation Policy Area covers generally steep and forested land. It includes the Warramate Hills, parts of Mt. Donna Buang Range and Pauls Range and theareas southofYarraJunction,Beenak,GladysdaleandWarburton. Only a small proportion of this Policy Area has been cleared in the past. Land uses in this PolicyAreaincludelimitedgrazingandpart timefarming,andtimberharvesting. Most land in this Policy Area is significant environmentally, for its flora, fauna, water protection and for its significant landscape values. The Warramate Hills and Mt. Donna Buang Range are National Trust "classified" landscapes. The Little Yarra River and its environs is a"recorded"landscape. Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the Rural Conservation Policy Areas is to protect and maintain native vegetation for its intrinsic value and for its value as a wildlife habitat, to protect landscape values and quality and to ensure that any land use is carried out in a mannercompatiblewiththemaintenanceofwaterquality. 5.05 Threats to the Primary Purposes of Rural Policy Areas The major threats to the primary purposes of Rural Policy Areas, particularly the objectiveofprovidingforthecontinuationofagricultural purposes, are:  thedemandforrural residential living;  thepressures forfurthersubdivision;  uses and developments not compatible with the protection and maintenance of rural landscapes; and  theinappropriateremoval ofnativevegetation. Policies for land use and management in Rural Policy Areas 5.06 Land use Land uses must be compatible with the regional goals, the regional objectives for rural land,andwiththeprimarypurposeforeachRural PolicyArea. 28. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5.07 Construction of buildings The construction of buildings (including houses and farm buildings) in Rural Policy Areas must be carried out in a manner that is compatible with the maintenance of rural and agricultural land uses, protection and, where possible, enhancement of landscape values, water resources, indigenous flora and fauna (and their habitat) and the provision ofacceptablestandards ofresidential health,safetyandamenity. Development within Rural Policy Areas may only occur on land (within a designated development envelope)which:  is not subject to excessive slopes (that is a slope greater than 20%), without proper regard being given to appropriate measures to ensure that soil erosion does not occur;  is not within a floodplain management area (except as allowed under Policy 10.02);  if subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybe used for controlled and limiteddevelopment;  is not within an area identified as having a high risk from wildfire, unless it has been shown that appropriate measures have been undertaken, to provide an acceptablelevel ofprotectiontothebuildingfrom wildfirerisk;  is of sufficient size, should there be no reticulated sewerage to which the building can connected, to enable proper on-site treatment of all wastes generated in the building and the disposal on-site of the effluent from the treatment;  enables all buildings and their waste treatment and effluent disposal means tobe located away from watercourses (by at least 30m), such that water quality is not adversely affected and stream and watercourse vegetation is protected from disturbance;  enables proper consideration to be given to the type of construction (external materials in particular) andthelocationofthebuildings andtheirancillaryworks (such as driveways and access roads), in a manner that avoids intrusion into the surrounding landscape, and which provides opportunities for protecting remnant indigenous vegetationandnatural habitat; and  demonstrates that any house or building requiring utility services are able to be provided with such services in a manner that will not have an adverse impact on theenvironment orlandscapeofthearea. 5.08 Tenement provisions Within Rural Policy Areas a tenement holding control must be introduced (or maintained) in the former Shires of Sherbrooke and Lillydale, so that development of a housewill onlyoccuronalot orparcel oflandwhichsatisfies oneofthefollowing:  is part of a tenement holding and is in excess of 4 ha. in area, except in the IntensiveAgriculture1PolicyAreawhereit must beinexcess of2ha;  was created in accordance with an approved Planning Scheme or Interim Development Order; 29. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  consists oftheconsolidationofall parcels and/orlots withinatenement holding;  is a lot which existed as a separate tenement holding on the date specified in the relevant ShirePlanningScheme; or 5.09 Tenement anomaly provisions Despite the requirement for tenement provisions, a planning scheme may modify the tenement provisions as theyapplytospecificlots, providedthat it is demonstratedthat:  The modification will not prejudicetheprimarypurposeofthepolicyareawithin which the lots occur and that the wider objectives of tenement controls for the policy area are protected from incremental erosion and are maintained as a legitimate means of protecting the areas identified from inappropriate development.  Services such as constructed roads, reticulated water supply and reticulated sewerage are available, without additional substantial costs to Council and servicing authorities and the provision of these and other utility services will haveminimal impact ontheenvironment orlandscapeofthearea.  Where reticulated sewerage is not available, the site must be of sufficient size to enableproperon-sitetreatment anddisposal ofall wastes.  Where the land is an area identified as having a high risk of wildfire hazard, appropriate building design measures will be required to be undertaken to provideanacceptablelevel ofprotection.  Development will not jeopardise the maintenance of any Site of Natural SignificanceorSiteofCultural significance.  There will be no detriment to the ecology of any stream or watercourse on or nearthesite,byvirtueoftheadditional development occurring.  The additional development can be considered to be infill in an area which is substantiallybuilt up.  The land is not subject to constraints to development, such as land instability, land liable to floodingor land withslopes of20%orgreater(unless whereslopes are greater than 20%, information has been provided that demonstrates that soil erosion will be minimised, landscape characteristics are protected or enhanced and the development and access to it can be appropriately located and land instabilitywill beminimised).  Clearingofnativevegetationis minimised. 5.10 Second houses in Rural Policy Areas In Rural PolicyAreas asecondhousemayonlybedevelopedonaparcel ofland,alot or atenement holdingwhere:  the additional house is to provide for a farm manager/caretaker or a relative of theowner/occupier; and  the area of the parcel of land, lot or tenement holding is of sufficient size so that a two lot subdivision could occur under the particular PolicyArea, within which thelandis situated. 30. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5.11 Forestry and timber production Forestry and timber production on private land with suitable native or other hardwood species, whether in plantations or in native forests, may be allowed subject to planning permit, provided that all activities including harvesting, roading, regeneration and fire protection are carried out in a manner compatible with the protection and maintenance of landscape values, water and soil resources, and maintenance of the integrityand long term conservationofanySites ofNatural SignificanceorSites ofCultural Significance. Softwoodplantations must beprohibitedwithintheRegion. In order to ensure that native forests and plantations are managed for their timber and other values in a sustainable manner, any proposal to carry out forestry or timber productiononprivatelandmust demonstratethat:  the land contains suitable timber resources of known quantity or it has the potential toberegeneratedwithsuitablenativespecies;  timber harvesting can be carried out without detrimental effects to the area's soils, landscapeandwaterresources andtoits floraandfauna;  appropriate native species (which will not create environmental problems) will be planted and silvicultural and management techniques will be applied to regenerate the harvested areas and to maintain the forest resources in a sustainablemanner;  plantations will only be established on land previously cleared of native vegetationandwhichis currentlybeingusedforagricultureorotherpurposes;  floodplainmanagement areas will beexcluded,and  timber harvesting will be excluded from the land within 30 metres of any watercourse. 5.12 Management of land for forestry and timber production The use or development of land for forestry in native forests, or for afforestation of native hardwood species must be on the basis of a proposal which contains a forest coupe plan, which addresses the matters contained in the Code of Forest Practice for TimberProductionandwhichspecifies:  coupelocationandcuttingareaboundaries;  methods of marking, cutting and removing wood and the estimated volume of woodtoberemoved;  wet weather and seasonal restrictions, and any other periods during which operations will limited;  areas excluded from harvesting to provide for flora and fauna protection under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988, water quality protection, landscape protection,andsignificant sites;  protectionandrehabilitationofsoils;  location, design, construction, maintenance and closure of timber extraction roads; 31. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  siting,useandrehabilitationoflandings, logdumps andsnigtracks;  silvicultural methods andregenerationprocedures tobeapplied;  fireprotectionrestrictions, and  other details or information which may influence the specific conduct of the operation,includingtrafficmovements toandfrom thesite. 5.13 Agroforestry Agroforestry using suitable native timber species and in association with agricultural production, may be allowed and is to be encouraged on land already cleared of native vegetationand/orondegradedandpreviouslyloggedareas needingrehabilitation. 5.14 Landscape protection The protection, maintenance and enhancement of landscapes and landscape character in Rural PolicyAreas must beensured. Inconsideringorcarryingout anyuses anddevelopments, it must beensuredthat:  visual and environmental values of landscapes in Rural Policy Areas are fully recognised,protectedandwherenecessaryenhanced;  all development is located so that it avoids prominent ridgelines, hill tops and visuallyexposedvalleys;  consideration is given to the use of non reflective surfaces or screen planting, and that the development is adequately set back from road frontages and access ways;  all development is designed and sited in a manner complementaryto its location, andcompatiblewithmaintenanceofcharacteroftheRural PolicyAreas;  all roads and access tracks are located, designed, constructed and landscaped in the manner compatible with maintenance of landscape values and character, and minimisationofsoil erosion;  all land use and development is managedandcontrolledtomaintainandenhance the visual amenity and the quality along the main roads and other access routes, andthat ribbondevelopment alongtheroads is strictlycontrolled,and  all use and development of land within landscapes "Classified" and "Recorded" by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria) will be carried out in a manner that is compatible with protection, maintenance and, where possible, enhancement of thelandscapecharacteroftheseareas. Councils are encouraged to develop guidelines and provide advisory services for the design and siting of houses, buildings and other works, in order to encourage sensitive approaches tolandscapeprotection. 5.15 Protection of agricultural practices: The maintenance and enhancement of agricultural practices in Rural Policy areas must be encouraged. To enable the longterm achievement of these aims, appropriate farming 32. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS practices necessary for successful operation of agricultural activities should be recognised.Suchpractices shouldhaveregardto:  Department ofAgricultureguidelines andrecommendations;  the diversityof agricultural pursuits and the uncertaintyof climatic conditions in theRegion;  thechangingtechnologyandconsumerpreferences foragricultural products;  theprimarypurposes oftheRural PolicyAreas; and  themaintenanceofenvironmental values. 5.16 Subdivision policies for Rural Policy Areas Subdivision in Rural Policy Areas must be managed in accordance with the primary purposeforeachPolicyAreaandtheregional goal andobjectives. Within Rural Policy Areas subdivision may be allowed and planning schemes may provide for a variety of subdivision techniques, including minimum lot controls, a densitycontrol andadensitymatrix technique. 5.17 Subdivision Yields The yield of lots, and the maximum and minimum lot sizes (for other than density matrix subdivisions)must conform tothefollowingtable: Maximum& PolicyArea Averagelotyield Minimumlotsizes IntensiveAgriculture1 1lottoeach 8ha 6ha-14ha ofsitearea IntensiveAgriculture2 1lottoeach 20ha 15ha-35ha ofsitearea Rural 1 1lottoeach 25ha 18ha-44ha ofsitearea Rural 2 1lottoeach 40ha 30ha-70ha ofsitearea Rural Landscape1 1lottoeach 8ha 6ha-14ha ofsitearea Rural Landscape2 1lottoeach 16ha 12ha-28ha ofsitearea Rural Conservation 1lottoeach 40ha 30ha-70ha ofsitearea Despitetheseprovisions, planningapproval maybegrantedforasubdivisionwhere:  The lot to be created is required for apublicuseorpublicpurpose,bytheCrown, apublicauthorityoraCouncil.  The purpose of the subdivision is to re-align a common boundary between two existing lots, where no additional lots will be created and where the re-alignment does not allow an increase in the number of houses that could be constructed on 33. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS the land beyond that permitted by the planning scheme prior to the subdivision takingplace.  The land is affected by Special Study Area or Restructure provisions and the subdivisionis inaccordancewiththerequirements ofthoseprovisions  The subdivision is for a multi-dwelling, shop, office, factoryor other similar use, whichis inaccordancewithaplanningscheme.  The subdivision is for the excision of a lot of between 0.8 ha and 1.2 ha (exclusive of an access driveway of not more than 3 metres in width) from land which:  Contains two houses which have lawfully been established and neither of the houses were established as dwellings ancillaryto an existinghouse on thelandsuchas a‘dependent relativeunit’oran‘ancillarydwelling’;  Eachnewlot contains aoneoftheestablishedhouses. Any lot created under this provision must not be further subdivided except in accordance with the maximum lot yield provisions, or for the realignment of a common boundary, or the lot to be created is required for a public purpose bythe Crown,apublicauthorityoraCouncil,as allowedbypolicy5.17. 5.18 Density matrix subdivision Planning schemes may provide for a density matrix subdivision technique, only within theRural 1,Rural 2andRural Landscape2PolicyAreas. Where a densitymatrix provision is to be provided, it must specifythat there be a single primary lot, with the remaining lots being within the range of 3 hectares to 5 hectares. The further subdivision of the primary lot in a density matrix subdivision must be prohibitedbytheplanningscheme. The creation of the primary lot in a density matrix subdivision must cover the land which is most suitable for agricultural uses or which has the most significant environmental values, and the small lots created must be located to minimise intrusion intothelandscapeandwhereappropriate,begroupedtoavoidlineardevelopment. 5.19 Subdivision management Any lot created by subdivision, (excluding lots created to provide for a Council, Public Authority or Government purpose) must comprise land which has at least 40% of its areathat:  is not subject toslopes of20%orgreater;  is not withinafloodplainmanagement area;  if it is subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybeusedforcontrolled andlimiteddevelopment. The subdivision of land must only be allowed when the size, shape and layout of proposedlots arecompatiblewith: 34. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  the terrain characteristics of the site slope, watercourses, soil types and vegetation;  acontinuingpotential foranagricultural usetheland;  thephysical landscapecharacteristics anduseofadjacent land;  the long term conservation of any Sites of Natural Significance and/or Sites of Cultural Significanceaffectingtheland; and  the capacity of any land subject to land instability to be reasonably and safely usedforcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. In any subdivision, access roads and development envelopes be located so that minimum earthworks are required, dominant landscape features such as ridgelines are free of development, and the maintenance of Sites of Natural Significance and Sites of Cultural Significanceis not jeopardised. 5.20 Other policies applying to Rural Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  PublicLand  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region 35. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan 35a REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES 6. PUBLIC LAND POLICIES 6.01 Regional Overview Public Land comprises approximately 70% of the Upper Yarra Valley & Dandenong Ranges Region. Most of this Public Land is in the forested, mountainous eastern part of the Region, but is also scattered throughout the settled western areas, particularlywithin the Dandenong Ranges. The Public Land presence dramatically affects the Region, becauseofits sizeandlocationandbecauseoftheresources it contains. The resources of Public Land in the Region have values for water and timber production, flora and fauna conservation, tourism and recreation, landscape protection andmany otherminoruses. 6.02 Responsibility for Public Land Management The primary responsibility for management of Public Land in the Region lies with the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Melbourne Parks & Water and Melbourne Water. Melbourne Water is responsible for the management of the Region's extensive water catchment areas, most of which are closed to public access. The Department of Conservation and Natural Resources has a broad public land management role, in the areas of national parks, soil conservation and land protection, conservation andforestry. 6.03 Land Conservation Council Recognition must be given to the recommendations of the Land Conservation Council, that have been adopted byGovernment, particularlywith regard to those policies for the MelbourneArea,District 2,whichcovers all areas ofPublicLandwithintheRegion. The Land Conservation Council recommendations, once adopted by Government, will specify the range of land uses for Public Land within the Region and must be implementedintheRegionandnot beover-ruledbytheRegional StrategyPlan. 6.04 Regional Objectives Theobjectives fortheRegion's PublicLands aretoensurethat:  PublicLandis managedinamannerconsistent withdecisions ofGovernment;  the use, development and management of all Public Land is consistent with the objective of seeking to enable increased protection for the special features and characteroftheRegion;  the longterm conservationofthenatural environment ofPublicLandis provided for,and  the renewable resources of Public Lands are managed in a way that provides for their sustainable use, and that non-renewable resources are used wisely, so that essential ecological processes andlifesupport systems aremaintained. 36. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES 6.05 Management of Public Land Public Land must be used and managed in accordance with State Planning Policies for the Region, recommendations of the Land Conservation Council which have been adopted by Government, and in a manner which is consistent with the Regional Objectives forPublicLand. Thelocationandextent ofall PublicLand PolicyAreas is shownon Map Series 1. 6.06 Public works and undertakings All works and undertakings carried out in the Region by a government department, public authorityor Council must be in conformitywith the Regional StrategyPlan. The organisation proposing to carry out the works and undertakings must obtain written confirmation from the relevant council that theproposedworks orundertakings conform with the Regional Strategy Plan. The Council may require that specified conditions must be met to ensure that the proposed works or undertakings conform with the Regional StrategyPlan. Disputes about conformity with the Regional Strategy Plan If there is a dispute with the Council about whether works and undertakings to be carried out by a government department, public authority or council are in conformity with the Regional Strategy Plan, the Premier will decide whether any works or undertakings mayproceed. The Premier must seek the advice of the Minister administering the Planning and Environment Act before deciding whether the proposed works or undertakings conform withtheRegional StrategyPlanandwhetheranyconditions shouldbeimposed. 6.07 Alienation of Crown Land There must be no further alienation of Crown land intheRegion,forprivatesale,except for rationalisation or management purposes or as provided for elsewhere in the Regional StrategyPlan. 6.08 Disposal of surplus Public Land Surplus public land held by a Government Department, Public Authority or a Council must not be disposed of without an assessment of community, public open space, recreation, heritage and environmental/conservation needs, and which may include retainingthelandinpublicownershipforanalternativepublicuse. 6.09 Road reserves, easements and linear reserves Remnant native vegetation, significant wildlife habitat and landscapes on linear reserves, including roadsides, stream frontages and railway (both used and disused) reserves must be protected and the revegetation of these areas with indigenous native species must beencouraged. 37. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES Unused road reserves or easements may only be alienated or leased where such road reserves or easements are not of special significance for nature conservation, recreation orotherpublicuse. The alienation or leasing of unused road reserves or easements in Sites of Natural Significance, must not occur until there is an appropriate agreement in place, between the agency currently controlling the land and Council, which provides for the most stringent limitationonclearingofnativevegetation. When a road reserve or other linear easement is alienated, it must be ensured that the retention of easement rights for public utilities, where appropriate, should be acondition of alienation; and/or if the reserve or easement is adjacent to other Public Land, provisionforpublicaccess whereappropriateshouldbeaconditionofthealienation. 6.10 Clearing of native vegetation on road reserves, easements and linear reserves The clearing of native vegetation on road reserves, easements and other linear reserves must be strictly controlled, so as to protect botanical, wildlife habitat and landscape values. Managers and owners of these areas must beencouragedtopreparerevegetation and rehabilitation programs for those areas that are devoid of vegetation or otherwise degraded. When issuing or renewing licences for unused road reserves or easements, the relevant Department shouldensurethat:  the intrinsic value of existing vegetation and its value as a refuge or habitat for wildlifearemaintained;  the area is protected from wildfire and soil erosion and noxious weeds and verminarecontrolled;  publicaccess is maintained,and  revegetation with indigenous native species is encouraged on unused road reserveoreasements, particularlyinSites ofNatural Significance. 6.11 Private use of Public Land Crown or other Public Land, which is leased or licensed for private use, must be protected from inappropriate use or development which would prejudice its future use for public purposes, or which would be inconsistent with policies for the underlying or adjacent Regional StrategyPlanPolicyArea. When consideringthe proposed issue of a lease or licenceforCrownorPublicLand,the Government Department or Public Authority responsible for the management of such land:  May, where appropriate, allow restricted and limited recreation use by the public.  Ensure that cultivation is not permitted, except with the approval of the Government Department or Public Authority responsible for the land's management. 38. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES  Should ensure that licensees provide stiles in any fences erected across their licencearea,whererequired.  Should ensure that the intendinglicence or lease holder has obtained the relevant approval orplanningpermit from theCouncil administeringtheplanningscheme for the area affected by the licence or lease, to use or develop that land for the intendedpurposeoftheleaseorlicence.  The use and development of privately owned land in Public Land Policy Areas must have regard to the policies generally applying in the vicinity of the subject land.  The use and development of public land which is not in a Public Land Policy Areamust haveregardtothepolicies forPublicLand. 6.12 Landscape protection The landscape character of Public Land in the Region is of high value and must be maintainedorenhanced,andspecial landscapefeatures must beprotected. Government Departments, Public Authorities and Councils responsible for management ofPublicLandmust ensurethat:  All proposed land use changes and activities are carried out in a manner which ensures that the landscape character is maintained or enhanced and special landscapefeatures areprotected.  Where the land is within a landscape ‘classified’ or ‘recorded’ by the National Trust ofAustralia(Victoria),regardmust behadtoanycitationapplyingtothose landscapes, inthecarryingout ofanyworks orundertakings.  Where such works and undertakings could have a significant landscape impact, advice should be sought from the National Trust prior to commencement of such works orundertakings. 6.13 Fire Protection All Public Land in the Region must be protected from fire and fire protection and suppression must be undertaken by relevant Government Departments or Public Authorities inaccordancewiththeFireManagement Policies inChapter20. 6.14 Water Resources The vital importance of Public Land within the Region for water production purposes must be recognised and the use of that land forthosepurposes must beprotected. Water resources on Public Land in the Region must be managed in accordance with Water Resources Policies inChapter17. 6.15 Forest management The importance of the forested Public Land in the Region as a source of timber and otherproducts must berecognised. Forest management must: 39. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES  ensure that the use of forests is sustainable for the full range of products and other benefits that forests provide, including recreation, water production, soil conservation andtheprotectionoffloraandfauna;  protect theidentifiedenvironmental values ofnativeforests;  ensure native forest management and timber harvesting operations are consistent withprotectionofforest environment;  have regard to the Code of Forest Practices, and in particular, minimise the permanent removal of native forest and increase the current net area of public nativeforest;  take account of any relevant State Government polices and/or strategies for conservation of natural resources and for the timber industry, especially with regard to encouragingreforestation, preferablywith nativespecies from thesame locality;  ensure that the traffic impacts from forestry uses do not have an adverse impact ontheenvironmental andlandscapevalues oftheareaandonnearbyroads; and  ensure that the land allocated for timber production is in accordance with the LandConservationCouncil recommendations adoptedbytheStateGovernment. 6.16 Timber production Timber harvesting, both hardwoods and softwoods on public and private land, and associated activities, must be carried out in a manner which minimises any detrimental effects ontheRegion's landscape,compositionofvegetation,wildlife,soil,waterquality andyields, recreationandtransport system. Timber harvesting, planning and operations must have regard to the Code of Forest Practices andanyspecificlocal prescriptions. Working Plans for timber production on Public Land within the Region must have regardtotheneedto:  conserve the natural environment and protect flora and fauna which has been identifiedinSites ofNatural Significance;  minimise adverse visual effects on the area, and take full account of the importanceoflandscapes ofspecial significance;  protect steep slopes, gullies, watercourses, riparian areas, minimise stream crossings andconstruct culverts and/orbridges wherecrossings occur;  minimise erosion and run-off and take measures to prevent the direct entry of run-offfrom roadsurfaces towatercourses;  rehabilitate and revegetate logged areas, including log loading areas, after harvesting; and  include any proposals for construction or major reconstruction of permanent roads. 40. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUBLICLANDPOLICIES 6.17 Softwood plantations Softwood plantations on Public Land within the Region must not be expanded beyond thoseareas designatedforthat purposebytheStateGovernment. 6.18 Recreation and Tourism A wide range of recreation and tourism opportunities must be maintained and provided for on Public Land, in accordance with the relevant Recreation and Tourism Policies in Chapter16. 6.19 Environmental education and research Environmental education awareness and research in the Region must be fostered, and areas of Public Land allocated specifically for environmental education purposes must be used and managed to provide opportunities for study of nature and natural ecosystems. 6.21 Other policies applying to Landscape Living Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan. 41. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE 7. MANAGEMENT OF SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE AND OTHER AREAS OF NATIVE VEGETATION 7.01 General Policy The long term protection and conservation of all remaining areas of remnant native vegetation and wildlife habitat, including that on land designated as a Site of Natural Significance, must be ensured. 7.02 Sites of Natural Significance Within any land that is designated as a Site of Natural Significance, as shown on Map 6 and described in Schedule 3, the clearing of native vegetation must be prohibited, except:  to provide for a land use, or the construction of a building or works, including utility services, which has been permitted under the Planning Scheme and where the native vegetation to be removed is detailed on a plan approved by the responsible authority;  where the vegetation to be removed is exempt from the permit requirements of the planning scheme. Where, within a Site of Natural Significance, clearing of native vegetation is required to provide for an approved use, development, buildings or works, construct an approved building and/or its driveway, it must be ensured that:  the removal of native vegetation is subject to a planning permit;  the removal of native vegetation is minimised and that such removal does not adversely affect the integrity of the site, and  clearing of native vegetation is avoided on slopes greater than 20% or within 30 metres of a watercourse. 7.03 Management of land in a Site of Natural Significance Sites of Natural Significance, and where necessary the areas in their vicinity, must be protected and managed to maintain and, where possible, enhance the natural resources and characteristics identified. This protection and management will be achieved by careful land use and development controls, and by the introduction of management practices which ensure that all use and development within Sites of Natural Significance are carried out in a manner which:  maintains the significance of existing native vegetation and its value as a refuge or habitat for wildlife;  prevents soil erosion;  protects the environment of watercourses;  protects the site from wildfire; 42. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE  includes measures to ensure that the condition of the site and the effectiveness of the program are monitored;  identifies areas within which development is to be precluded, and areas which require treatment in specified ways;  provides for an appraisal of areas in the vicinity of a Site of Natural Significance and the development of programs, where possible, which are supportive of the management of the Site of Natural Significance and for consideration of external factors in relation to the site, such as buffer zones, flight paths for birds and the need for feral animal and environmental weed control;  ensure measures are taken to eradicate environmental weed infestations, to prevent degradation of the site, and  protects the site from domestic pets and vermin. 7.04 Further actions for Sites of Natural Significance Further investigation of environmental resources, and identification of additional Sites of Natural Significance where desirable, must be carried out. All owners and occupiers of Sites of Natural Significance should be informed of their importance and significance, and of the best ways to conserve and protect them. Government Departments, Public Authorities and Councils responsible for management of land within Sites of Natural Significance must ensure their protection, and must prepare and implement programs for the proper management of that land. Encouragement and assistance must be given for further research to identify additional Sites of Natural Significance and to improve knowledge of the habitat and management requirements of flora and fauna, and to coordinate the preparation of a public information program for the Region to increase public awareness of the need to identify, protect and manage these Sites. 7.05 Additional measures to protect Native Vegetation Additional measures to maintain and enhance the integrity of native vegetation must be provided for. Some of these measures include the:  facilitation and active encouragement of environmental weed eradication measures, and active discouragement of planting of environmental weeds, including the development of an environmental weed management strategy for the Region;  facilitation and active encouragement of revegetation with indigenous species, particularly in the establishment/reinforcement of wildlife corridors between Sites of Natural Significance and other areas of significant remnant vegetation;  active encouragement to fence off stock from areas containing native vegetation;  facilitation of measures to inform residents and visitors of the Region's rich natural environment and the importance of its conservation;  requirement that public utilities and firebreaks, wherever possible, are located over cleared land rather than over areas with remnant vegetation; 43. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE  requirement that native vegetation on roadside reserves be conserved, wherever possible, during road construction, upgrading and all other times;  investigation of the feasibility of providing incentives for the conservation of Sites of Natural Significance;  ensuring that fire prevention measures in areas of native vegetation have conservation of flora and fauna as a high priority, and that fuel reduction programs are monitored to evaluate whether the objectives are being met in the medium to long term, and  promotion of amendments to the licensing system for use of public land to ensure that conservation of Sites of Natural Significance is a high priority. The Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Councils and voluntary groups and organisations, are encouraged to develop information systems and provide advisory services to the landowners on the values, maintenance and management of native vegetation, particularly in Sites of Natural Significance. Planning schemes must ensure that, within all Landscape Living, Rural and Public Land Policy Areas, a planning permit is required for the removal or clearance of native vegetation, except where exemptions apply under the planning scheme. 7.06 Management of Sites of Natural Significance on Public Land The long-term conservation of Sites of Natural Significance on Public Land must be ensured. The management of Public Land containing Sites of Natural Significance must be through appropriate management programs. These programs must be in conformity with the Regional Strategy Plan and must include:  identification of the location and the extent of the Site of Natural Significance;  measures to contain any adverse effects brought about by the use or development of the land which contains the Site;  measures to retain and enhance native vegetation;  consideration of external factors in relation to the site, such as buffer zones, flight paths for birds, the control of feral animals and environmental weeds, wildlife refuges and corridors for wildlife movement; and  measures to prevent degradation of the site and to ensure that the condition of the site and the effectiveness of the program are monitored. Any Government Department, Public Authority or Council carrying out works or undertakings in a Site of Natural Significance, must ensure that in carrying out those works and undertakings, they have regard to:  any management program prepared for the site;  the maintenance and enhancement of landscape character;  the intrinsic value of existing vegetation and its value as a refuge or habitat for wildlife;  the prevention of soil erosion; 44. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE  the protection and the need for enhancement of the environment of watercourses;  the protection of the area from wildfire; and  the protection of the area from environmental and noxious weeds, vermin and domestic animals. 45. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE 8. MANAGEMENT OF SITES OF CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE 8.01 General Policy The protection and conservation of land, features or buildings designated as Sites of Cultural Significancemust beensured. 8.02 Management of Sites of Cultural Significance The use, development, alteration or demolition of a site or feature, designated as a Site of Cultural Significance in Schedule 2, may only be allowed where it will be subject toaplanningpermit andwhereit is demonstratedthat:  the integrity and the special values of the site or feature will not be jeopardised; and  where relevant, advice pursuant to the provisions of the Archaeological and Aboriginal Relics Preservation Act 1972 (as amended) and/or the Historical Buildings Act 1981,has beenobtainedandhadregardto. Restoration of Sites of Cultural Significancemust beactivelyencouragedandall owners and occupiers of Sites of Cultural Significance must be informed of their site’s importanceandsignificance,andofthebest ways toconserveandprotect them. Councils and other relevant bodies, such as theVictoriaArchaeological Survey,Historic Buildings Council and National Trust of Australia (Victoria), should be encouraged to identify and evaluate further Sites of Cultural Significance, and to develop and provide information and advisory services on the importance and significance of Sites of Cultural Significance,andon thebest ways toconserve,protect andmanagethem. 8.03 Management of Sites of Cultural Significance on Public Land Sites of Cultural Significance located on Public Land must be conserved and be protected from any inappropriate land uses, works or undertakings, by ensuring that (where relevant) advice is obtained from the National Trust of Australia (Vic.), the Historic Buildings Council or the Victorian Archaeological Survey, prior to any works and undertakings on or in the vicinity of these sites or features, and no demolition or destruction of these sites or features occurs without the prior agreement of the Minister forPlanning. The identification of further Sites of Cultural Significance on Public Land within the Region must be encouraged, so that these sites, if they are significant, are not destroyed oradverselyaffected. 46. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUFFINGBILLYRAILWAYSCENICCORRIDOR 9. PUFFING BILLY RAILWAY SCENIC CORRIDORS 9.01 The Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor The Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor identifies those areas that are an important component ofthelandscapeandcharacterofthePuffingBillyRailwayLine. The Corridor contains built and natural features including historic railway stations and bridges, residential development, gardens and remnant vegetation. It is important that the cultural and scenic significance of the Corridor, and the close and distant viewlines from the railway line, are protected by ensuring that future use and development along theCorridors areappropriatelysitedandintegratedwiththeenvironment. For the purpose of applyingplanningcontrols, the Corridor is separated intoa‘primary’ scenic corridor and a ‘secondary’ scenic corridors. The ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’ Puffing BillyRailwayScenic Corridors are defined bythe PuffingBillyRailwayScenic CorridorOverlayintheSherbrookePlanningScheme(as at 14July1994). The Primary Scenic Corridor, which denotes those areas in the immediate vicinity of the Puffing Billy Railway Line, is where use and development would potentially have thegreatest visual impact. The SecondaryScenic Corridor, which denotes the more distant views from the Puffing Billy Railway Line, is where use and development still needs to be carefully controlled tomaintaintheoverall visual characterandexperienceofthecorridor. 9.02 Primary Purposes for the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor The important environmental, landscape and cultural character of the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridors must continue to be protected. Within these Corridors, the primarypurposes areto:  Protect the historic and cultural importance of the Puffing Billy Railway Line andthesceniccorridorthroughwhichit passes.  Retain remnant vegetation in recognition of its important contribution to characterofthecorridorandtheShireandits roleas awildlifehabitat.  Retain and enhance significant cultural landscapes and indigenous vegetation whichalso contributetotheoverall characterandinterest ofthecorridor.  Ensure that all useanddevelopment inthecorridor,includingthealterationtoor maintenance of existingdevelopment is sited and designed so as to maintain and enhancethevisual characterandqualityofthecorridor.  Encourage appropriate landscaping predominantly with indigenous species as a means of soil stabilisation, screening of built elements and general visual enhancement. 47. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - PUFFINGBILLYRAILWAYSCENICCORRIDOR Puffing Billy Railway Primary Scenic Corridor  Ensure that any use, development or works on land within the Puffing Billy Railway Primary Scenic Corridor are appropriately designed and sited, having regardtotheneedforsuchtohaveaminimal visual effect onthat corridor.  Retain, maintain and enhance the important and immediate existing visual environs ofthePuffingBillyRailway. Puffing Billy Railway Secondary Scenic Corridor  Ensure that any use, development or works on land within the Puffing Billy Railway Secondary Scenic Corridor are appropriately designed and sited, having regard to the wider landscape needs of that corridor, particularly in respect of its relationshiptothePrimaryScenicCorridor.  Maintain and enhance the important wider landscape and panoramas of the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor, and their value in adding to the experienceoftravellers usingtherailway. 9.03 Management of use and development within the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor The protection and conservation of landscapes within, and the character of, the Puffing BillyRailwayScenicCorridormust beensured. Within the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor, the use or development of land (including subdivision) must be strictly controlled and may only be allowed - subject to aplanningpermit -whereit is demonstratedthat:  The location, bulk and appearance of the proposed use, development or works will not adverselyaffect thecharacterandappearanceofthecorridor.  Appropriate landscape treatments are proposed for setback areas, particularly setbacks to the railway line, and in relation to development or works in visually exposedlocations.  The impact of any use, development or works on the quality and character of important viewlines andpanoramas from therailwaylinecanbeminimised.  Appropriate measures are proposed to retain and enhance the landscape character and quality of the corridor and in particular, retain remnant vegetation andrequirelandscapingpredominantlywithindigenous species. 48. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - FLOODPLAINMANAGEMENT 10. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 10.01 General Policy The essential function of land within floodplain management areas, as a floodway and floodpondage,must beensured. Floodplain management areas are defined as being land which would be inundated as a result of a flood event which has a probability of occurrence of 1% in any one year, as assessedbytherelevant DrainageAuthority. The use or development of land within floodplain management areas must only be allowedwhereit canbedemonstratedthat theuseordevelopment does not:  create a situation endangering life, health or safety in the event of a flood, particularlywhere the development involves the provision of access and services such as water, sewerage, waste disposal, drainage, electricity, gas and communications;  divert or adversely affect the passage or storage of flood waters or raise flood levels onlandwithinoradjoiningthefloodway;  place demands on anydisaster or relief organisations or anyDrainage Authority, intheevent ofaflood;  create a hazard by installation, storage, processing or handling of materials or equipment which in the event of flood may become buoyant, flammable, explosive,toxicorotherwisepotentiallyinjurious tolifeorproperty;  causeerosion orsiltationofthefloodway;  increasethenatural rise,rateofriseorfall offloodwaters inthefloodway,or  alter the environment to an extent that is detrimental to the natural ecosystem andtootherestablishedlanduses withinthefloodway. 10.02 Floodplain management within Township Policy Areas The use or development (including landfill) of land a within Township Policy Areas, which is also within a floodplain management area, may only be allowed, subject to a planningpermit,for:  earthworks (includinglandfill),wheretheyarekept toaminimum;  anextensiontoanexistinglawfullyestablishedbuilding;  the construction of a building on land designated as a Flood Fringe Area, as designated on Map Series 14, provided that the floor level of that building is at least 300mm abovethefloodlevel designatedbytheDrainageAuthority. Where a building, other than a house or similar residential building, is adjacent to similar existing development and it is necessaryto have floors or access ways at similar levels, a floor level may be specified below the level required, 49. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - FLOODPLAINMANAGEMENT provided that the Drainage Authority gives its agreement and that it is satisfied that alternative flood protection measures will be taken. In no circumstance will afloorlevel bespecifiedthat is belowthe1%floodlevel. It is to be noted that such restrictions would be altered by the construction of flood mitigation works constructed with the approval of the relevant drainage authority, such as levee banks and retarding basins, which could remove the protectedareafrom beingliabletofloodingfrom a1%floodevent. Additional flood fringe areas within Township Policy Areas may be designated in a planningscheme,withtheagreement oftherelevant DrainageAuthority. 10.03 Floodplain management within Landscape Living and Rural Policy Areas The essential function of the floodplain management area in Landscape Living and Rural PolicyAreas, as floodwayand flood pondage area must be ensured. Other values to be protected include agricultural production, highly sensitive landscapes, important wildlifehabitat andoutdoorrecreation. The construction of a house (other than an extension toanexisting,lawfullyestablished, house) on land in a Landscape Living Policy Area or a Rural PolicyArea, which is also withinafloodplainmanagement area,must beprohibited. Any other use or development (including landfill) may only be allowed subject to a planningpermit andonlywheretheresponsibleauthorityis satisfiedthat:  earthworks (includinglandfill)arekept toaminimum;  all development, includingfences, undertaken in association with an allowed use ordevelopment is kept toaminimum;  land uses whichareallowedareconfinedtothoseuses whichdonot detract from the flood pondage or create a hazard in the event of a flood and all development and works are undertaken in accordance with State Environmental Protection Policies;  in the case of landfill, there will be no creation of an island-type situation, requiring access above the flood level in the form of a causeway or isthmus - with the possible need for culverts or pipes to allow stream flows or passage of floodwaters; and  thecomments oftheDrainageAuthorityhavebeensought andhadregardto. 50. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SPECIALSTUDYAREAS 11. SPECIAL STUDY AREAS 11.01 Regional Overview The Region contains a number of ‘old and inappropriate’ subdivisions in Township, Landscape Living and Rural Policy Areas. These small lot subdivisions were generally created early this century and are a problem, particularly in the Dandenong Ranges and parts oftheUpperYarraValley. In many cases these ‘old and inappropriate’ subdivisions are located in environmentally sensitive areas and are especially inappropriate if they are also in an area prone to flooding, with high fire hazards, prone to soil erosion or in a situation where pollution and landscape degradation may result from development or where provision of social andphysical services wouldbetoocostlyornot feasible. Investigations into many of these problems has resulted in various public acquisition and restructure programs being introduced. These programs are designed to jointly satisfy the environmental impact question, and also to help landowners facing difficulties withtheseproblem subdivisions. To a large extent, the implementation of restructure and management programs has been carried out. Further work is required in some areas to arrive at appropriate solutions. The Regional Strategy Plan recognises this need by maintaining the identification of these areas, as Special StudyAreas. The policies now in place will ensure the on-going implementation of the Special StudyAreas previouslyidentified and will provideforthe resolution of further areas that may be identified as needing similar management programs. 11.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the Special Study Area policies is to ensure that potentially serious environmental and social impacts resulting from inappropriate subdivision development areovercome. 11.03 Regional Policies Subdivision restructure programs, as identified in local sections of planning schemes should be continued. Further studies should be undertaken and solutions developed for those subdivisions where serious problems may still exist or may emerge, or where investigatorystudies havenot yet takenplace. Additional subdivision restructure programs should be initiated where it can be demonstrated that serious environmental and/or social detriment will occur through the development ofanareainits present subdividedform. Additional subdivision restructure programs may be identified where groups of small lots (usually 0.4 hectares or less) exist and where one or more of the following are present: 51. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SPECIALSTUDYAREAS  services such as road, water supply and sewerage cannot be provided without excessive cost and where the provision of services would have serious detrimental environmental implications;  any development will cause serious environmental damage irrespective of the degreeofservicing;  accessibility is poor and the lots are in an isolated location with regard to communityfacilities andotherservices;  thedangerfrom wildfireis acute;  development of the land would cause a detrimental visual impact on the landscapecharacterofthearea;  development will jeopardise the maintenance or enhancement of a Site of Natural SignificanceoraSiteofCultural Significance; and  wheredevelopment oftheareawouldcausesignificant trafficproblems. 52. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - HUMANSERVICES 12. HUMAN SERVICES 12.01 Introduction The delivery of human services in the Upper Yarra and Dandenong Ranges Region needs tobeconsideredwithinthecontext of:  Changes inthecompositionandcharacteristics oftheRegion’s population.  The necessityfor coordinated planningto ensure that services are delivered toall sectors ofthepopulationwhenandwheretheyareneeded.  The goals of providing more equitable access to opportunities, services and facilities forall members ofthecommunity.  Access to economic resources, power, essential goods and services, guaranteed equal rights and expanded opportunities for residents to participate in decision- making. 12.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Human Services Policy is to ensure that all current and future land use planning decisions are considered in relation to the impact they may have on the usage of existing human services and facilities and whether such decisions will necessitatetheprovisionofadditional services andfacilities. The following factors need to be considered when future planning decisions are being made.  access toexistingfacilities andservices;  access toadditional facilities andservices that mayarisefrom suchdecisions;  cost oftheprovisionofservices andfacilities;  responsibilityforfunding,management andprovisionofservices andfacilities;  the timing of provision of services and facilities, including pre-planning in order for Government agencies and Councils to include estimates in their budget negotiations;  use of flexible and innovative designs (such as services provided on a mobile or sessional basis as outreach from selected major service centres within the Region)toaccommodateexistingandchangingcommunityneeds;  the possibility of cost-sharing arrangements or joint planning of facilities and services withneighbouringmunicipalities and/orRegions, and  clusteringandmultipleuseoffacilities andservices, whereappropriate. Councils, appropriate Government Departments and community service bodies are encouraged to work together in a cooperative and coordinated manner, in order to implement this policy. In particular, and in relation to any land use and development planning decision with significant implications for the availability and delivery of facilities andservices, it shouldbeensuredthat: 53. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - HUMANSERVICES  up to date information on the nature, location and current usage of services and facilities relevant tothat decisionis available;  deficiencies of facilities andservices fortheexistingandpotential populationare identifiedandadequatelyaddressed;  anexaminationofaccessibilityofexistingservices andfacilities is carriedout;  appropriate measures are included in the planning decision, where appropriate, toimproveaccessibilitywheredeficiencies havebeenidentified; and  consideration is given to the most appropriate method of service delivery, including the possibility of innovative approaches to meeting existing or anticipateddemand. 54. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES 13. ACTIVITY CENTRES 13.01 Regional Overview The intended role of the Region's activity centres, which refer generally to what people call their ‘shopping’ and ‘community’ centres, is to provide an appropriate range of retail and commercial services - together with community and social facilities - to meet the needs of residents and visitors. This role is supported by State Government policies for metropolitan ‘activity’ centres, which encourage the clustering and integrated planning of activities in preferred centres. Major activity centres in the northern sector of the Region include Lilydale, Chirnside Park. These centres are augmented by other larger centres, including Kilsyth, Mooroolbark, Mt. Evelyn, Seville, Yarra Junction, Warburton, Healesville and Yarra Glen. The main centres in the southern sector are Belgrave, Monbulk and Upwey, most of which are on Burwood Highway. There is no major activity centre comparable to Lilydale or Chirnside Park within the southern sector. The policies of the Regional Strategy Plan provide a flexible and goal-oriented approach to activity centre planning. They have been developed in recognition of a number of premises, including:  that despite the growth in population and associated demand for services, the previously anticipated level of growth in retail and commercial floorspace has not occurred, resulting in an under supply in some locations;  the growth of significant ‘regional’ shopping centres outside the Region, especially at Ringwood, Croydon and Knox City, has been to some extent based on the population growth within the Region;  changes in employment location preferences and settlement patterns and the need to decrease the high level of escape retail spending that currently leaks from the Region; and  the need to provide more adequately for the Region's population growth, and to plan more effectively for commercial centre development within the Region. 55. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES Bulky goods retailing is occurring in the western parts of the Region. Most of the floorspace is currently located in industrial zones. Bulky goods retailing opportunities should be provided in appropriate locations, preferably within the western part of the Region. 13.02 Primary Purpose To maintain a network of vibrant activity centres that collectively offer a wide and equitably distributed range of commercial services, employment opportunities, and community infrastructure. 13.03 Objectives for all Commercial Centres  Encourage retail, commercial, entertainment, community and other intensive employment generating activities to locate within established activity centres.  Ensure that activity centres are well designed places where people can enjoy shopping, doing business and participating in community activities.  Manage future use and development within activity centres that recognise and strengthen the role of the centre as set out in the Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table.  Facilitate within activity centres, a diverse mix of land uses that contribute to net community benefit and do not adversely affect the level of service provided by other centres in the activity centre network.  Promote additional housing within and adjoining activity centres.  Ensure services are clustered and provided in a convenient location which is accessible to many by travel on foot, bicycle or improved public transport.  For those activity centres expected to experience further significant development pressure, prepare structure plans to set strategic directions for future land use, development and the provision of supporting infrastructure. 13.04 Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table Activity Centre Type Role Major Activity Centres These centres provide a large, diverse and intensive mix of retail, commercial, entertainment, cultural and other uses. Chirnside Park and Lilydale They have strong public transport links, serve a large regional-sized catchment, and are priority locations for future private and public sector development and more diverse residential development. Large Neighbourhood Activity Centres Smaller in floorspace terms than Major Activities Centres, these centres have a retail mix that is focussed on Belgrave, Healesville, Kilsyth, convenience and grocery shopping. They also provide a Monbulk, Mooroolbark, Mount Evelyn, range of community services to the surrounding Seville, Yarra Glen, Yarra Junction communities. Some of these centres, which serve a catchment that extends 56. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES Activity Centre Type Role into the rural hinterland, perform a significant role in the provision of community and civic services, with some also providing a range of facilities and services for tourists. Small Neighbourhood Activity Centres These centres have a more limited role in providing convenience retailing and community facilities for an Coldstream, Montrose, Mount immediate surrounding catchment. Dandenong, Olinda, Sassafras, Tecoma., Upwey, Wandin North, Warburton, Woori Yallock. Local Activity Centres Local Activity Centres consist of a small group of shops that typically serve a local walk-in catchment, and provide for the Examples include: daily convenience and ‘top up’ needs of local residents and Colby Drive - Belgrave South, Monbulk passing motorists. Road Silvan and Switchback Road - Chirnside Park Some of these centres contain a limited number of community facilities and other uses. Proposals for use and development of land should be consistent with and support the identified role for the relevant activity centre as set out in the Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table. 57. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY 14. MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY 14.01 Regional Overview The Region has a small but well established industrial base consistingof manufacturing, processing, and service industries, which range from traditional industries servicing agricultureandsawmilling,todynamicindustries inhightechnology. Over 60% of the Region's industrial establishments are located in the Lilydale area. With most of the activity concentrated in Kilsyth, Lilydale and Chirnside Park. These areas also have the largest amount of vacant industrial land, most of which however, is committedfordevelopment intheshort tomedium term. There are limited numbers of, and opportunities for, industrial establishments in Healesville,Woori YallockandWesburn(whichis partiallydeveloped). Traditionally, manufacturing industries have been regarded as a non-desirable activityin the Region. This perception, however is gradually changing for manyindustries, which through the use of high technology, sensitive designs and siting, have acquired alevel of public acceptance. It is important therefore that anynew industries to be attracted to the Region exhibit a high level of community acceptance, achieve compatibility with the environment andmaintenanceofamenity. The Regional Strategy Plan promotes the need to develop a sustainable economy. Support needs to be given to the maintenance and growth of local enterprises within the agricultural, commercial, tourism and industrial areas, provided they are ecologically sustainable; maintain local amenity; and are accepted by the community at large as contributingtowards animprovement inlifestyles fortheRegion's residents. Despite the employment opportunities available within the Region, the outer eastern suburbs of Melbourne will continue to provide the major employment source for the Region’s residents. However, growth in employment will be closely linked to the changes occurringthroughtheincreasedprovisionoftertiaryeducationintheRegion. 14.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the manufacturing and industry policies is to control and coordinate the provision of land for industry, whilst providing for an increase in employment opportunities for local communities. At the same time it is intended to control the nature and scale of development so that environmental values such as flora, fauna, water quality and yields, air quality and landscape values are not adversely affected,andthat theresidential amenityoftheareais maintained. 14.03 Existing industrial zones Industrywill be encouraged to locateinexistingIndustrial Zones and,wherepossible,to makemoreefficient useofvacant andpartlydevelopedland. In providing for industrial or manufacturing uses and development, planning authorities must ensurethat: 61. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY  areticulatedsewerageandwatersupplyis available;  appropriate off-street parking, vehicular access and loading facilities are provided;  the siting, design and appearance of buildings have minimal adverse impact on thesurroundinglandscape;  all liquid and other wastes will be disposed of in an appropriate manner, and noise minimised, in accordance with the requirements of the Environment ProtectionAuthority,toensuretheprotectionoftheamenityofthearea;  the safetyand amenityof residential areas near an industrial use are protected by controllingheavytrucktraffic;  where applicable, large storage areas are separated from residential areas and screenedfrom publicview;  wherever possible, industrial uses are grouped to ensure the economical provision,extensionandmaintenanceofutilities, and  adequate provision is made for the landscaping of site and that appropriate controls are put in place to cover maximum building site coverage, and appropriateset backs toensureadequatelandscapingofsite. 14.04 Additional land for industry Additional land for industry may be provided in appropriate areas in the Region in accordance with performance standards. Prior to land being rezoned for industrial or manufacturinguses, it must bedemonstratedthat:  there is a need for such land in the area, and that the land proposed to be rezoned is both suitable and capable of supporting the industrial and/or manufacturing uses sought;  therearenophysical and/orenvironmental constraints affectingtheland;  noiseandodourdischarges will becontrolled,toprotect theamenityofadjoining areas, particularly any nearby residential areas, in accordance with standards approvedbytheE.P.A.  the rezoning will not have adverse effect on the Region's environmental values, includinglandscape,flora,fauna,water,andairquality;  the rezoning will not have an adverse effect on the Region's agriculture, tourism, andrecreational activities, oronroads orresidential amenity;  the land is located so that it can be serviced by a major access route and that therewill benoadverseimpacts onsurroundingroads;  asuitablebufferfrom residential development canbeprovided,and  there is adequate provision of essential services and suitable provision for treatment of solid and liquid wastes and disposal of effluent, preferably through theprovisionofreticulatedliquidwastedisposal facilities. 14.05 Saw Mills 62. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - MANUFACTURINGANDINDUSTRY New sawmills may be allowed in existing industrial zones or in appropriate zones withinRural PolicyAreas, providedthat it is demonstratedthat;  thesiteis suitableandcapableofsupportingsuchauseanddevelopment;  there are no physical or environmental constraints affecting the land on which thedevelopment andusewill occur;  detriment tothelandscapevalues oftheareawill beminimised;  thereis adequateprovisionofessential services;  noise and waste discharges to the environment are controlled and are in accordancewithstandards approvedbytheE.P.A.;  the land is not within an area subject to high bush fire danger and that appropriatemeasures forfirepreventionaretaken,and  the land is serviced with suitable vehicular access and the development will not causeadversetrafficimpacts onsurroundingroads. 14.06 Employment Issues In support of the primary purposes for these policies, consideration must be given not only to employment generation, but to servicing the educational and training needs of theRegion's residents. Ways inwhichthis canbeachievedinclude:  examining ways in which the employment base of the Region can be broadened, includingtertiaryemployment;  working with appropriate authorities to establish new employment initiatives which more adequatelyutilise the readysource of labour, particularlythe young, the unemployed and those on low incomes who have to commute long distances tofindemployment; and  working with appropriate educational bodies to ensure the development of a comprehensive range of training and retraining opportunities for the Region's workforce. 63. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, MINING & SOIL REMOVAL 15. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, MINING AND SOIL REMOVAL 15.01 Regional Overview Extractive industry, which include extraction of hard rock and clay, occurs in a number of locations in the Region, in a manner that has remained relatively unchanged over many years. It is an activity that is important in the provision of materials for road making and manufacturing of roofing tiles. In order to protect top soil as an essential natural resource, the prohibition on soil removal, particularly for commercial purposes, will be reinforced and the removal of soil will only be allowed when associated with an approved development, such as buildings and dams. Mining is a minor activity in the Region, with only one small gold mine at Hoddles Creek which has not operated for some years. 15.02 Primary Purpose - Extractive Industries The primary purpose of the Extractive Industries Policies is to control the development and siting of existing and future extractive industry operations, so as to ensure minimal detrimental impact on the Region's environment, landscape and water resources and on the amenity of its residents. 15.03 Extractive Industry policies Extractive Industry, whether as an expansion of an existing operation or through the establishment of a new operation, must be controlled to minimise detriment to the Region's environment, landscape and water resources and on the amenity of its residents. All extractive industry sites must be satisfactorily rehabilitated in accordance with conditions specified in the relevant extractive industry approvals for the site. New extractive industry operations must not be established within the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area, National/State Parks, closed catchments, the Yarra Tributaries, Reference Areas, Sites of Natural and Cultural Significance, the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor and within any ‘Environmental Living Zone’. The expansion of an existing extractive industry may occur within a Site of Natural Significance provided that the expansion is in accordance with a detailed working plan, which has been agreed by the responsible authority and which restricts the removal of vegetation to specific areas shown within that detailed working plan. 15.04 Primary Purpose - Mining The primary purpose of the Mining Policies is to facilitate the development and siting of existing and future mining operations in a manner which minimises detrimental effects 64. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, MINING & SOIL REMOVAL on the Region's environment, landscapes, water resources and the amenity of the Region's residents. 15.05 Mining policies Mining operations must be designed and managed to minimise detriment to the Region's environment, landscapes, water resources and the amenity of the Region's residents Mining operations must only be established in accordance with a planning approval unless the proposal has been the subject of an Environmental Effects Statement. New mining operations must not be established within the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area, National/State Parks, closed catchments, Yarra Tributaries, Reference Areas, Sites of Natural and Cultural Significance and in the Puffing Billy Railway Scenic Corridor. Rehabilitation of mining sites must be in accordance with the conditions as specified by the licence issued under the Mineral Resources Development Act 1993. 15.06 Land management provisions for extractive industry, mineral prospecting and mining Any extractive industry or mining proposals which require planning approval must demonstrate that:  there is a need for the particular use or development at that specific location;  the nature and intensity of the use or development is appropriate on that specific site;  any undesirable effects of the use or development by reason of its appearance, use or discharge of noise or wastes into the environment or any other detrimental effects on the landscape, soil erosion or water quality or on the amenity of the surrounding areas, will be minimised or controlled;  all works will be carried out in accordance with the conditions specified in any permit issued or any exploration or mining licence issued by the relevant Minister;  noise and waste discharges will meet the requirements of the Environment Protection Act;  traffic will be controlled so that there will be minimal impacts on adjoining roads, particularly those giving access to residential areas and measures to minimise dust emanating from vehicles using the site are instituted;  any adverse effects of the use or development on the amenity of the local residents are minimised;  advertising signs and/or company identification signs are located and designed so they do not detract from the landscape character of the area nor unnecessarily distract passing traffic;  the intrinsic value of existing native vegetation and its value as a refuge or habitat for wildlife is maintained;  the advice of the relevant Minister is obtained under the provisions of the Environment Effects Act, 1978, prior to the approval of any rezoning; and 65. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, MINING & SOIL REMOVAL  if the land is Public Land, agreement is obtained from the relevant Public Authority, Government Department or Council that controls the land. 15.07 Primary Purpose - Soil Removal The primary purpose of the Soil Removal Policy is to strictly control, and where necessary prohibit, the removal of soil in all Rural and Landscape Living Policy Areas in order to protect the soil as an agricultural resource and to avoid soil erosion and land degradation. 15.08 Soil removal policies Soil removal in Rural and Landscape Living Policy Areas Soil removal in all Rural and Landscape Living Policy Areas must be subject to planning approval and must only be allowed where:  the soil to be removed is surplus to the construction or maintenance of an approved dam which is necessary for the supply of water to the agricultural use of that land or for domestic and/or industrial water supply purposes and where the retention of that surplus soil on the subject land would reduce its suitability and/or capability for the continuation of its existing or a future agricultural operation, or  the soil to be removed is to allow for the carrying out of an approved use or development, for which the retention of that soil would prejudice the use or development of the land, and the consideration and approval of that soil removal was part of the approval of the use or development. Soil removal for public works and undertakings Removal of soil by a Council, Government Department or Public Authority in association with works and undertakings or for normal maintenance operations, will be allowed, provided sufficient suitable soil is retained on site for use in appropriate rehabilitation of batters and other exposed earthworks. 66. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM 16. RECREATION AND TOURISM 16.01 Regional Overview It is estimated that some three to five million visitors are attracted to the Region each year, with the Dandenong Ranges National Park alone attracting close to one million people. Approximately 70% of the Region's land is held in public ownership, and within this area significant land has been set aside for parks. The reservoir parks associated with Melbourne’s water supply, such as Maroondah and Silvan reservoirs, have been popular for decades as a `developed' recreation setting. `Natural' recreation areas are generally found in the forested areas of the ranges surrounding the Yarra Valley and in the Olinda State Forest and at Mt. Donna Buang. Both `developed' and `natural' parks within the Region attract thousands of visitors annually. Two of Victoria's major tourist attractions, the Healesville Sanctuary and the Puffing Billy Tourist Railway, are located within the Region. In addition, there is significant tourist activity associated with the Yarra Valley wine industry. The Yarra Valley's reputation for cool-climate quality wines is spreading, with an increasing recognition of the potential for related eating and overnight accommodation facilities, in select parts of the Region. In the Dandenong Ranges, the diverse range of cultural attractions, the picturesque gardens, and the contrasting urban-rural landscapes and bushland settings provide an ideal focus for local, interstate and international visitors. A number of recent recreational trends need to be taken into account in the planning, development and management of the Region's open space. There is evidence of greater interest in unstructured outdoor activities such as walking and cycling within `natural' settings. Outdoor social activities such as picnics and barbecues have maintained their traditional appeal, particularly for family groups and organisations. As Melbourne continues to grow in area and population, particularly in the South East Growth Area (Berwick and Pakenham), it is expected that the number of Melbourne residents using major parks just beyond the metropolitan area will also grow. If properly managed, tourism and recreation can have significant economic benefits, particularly if visitors can be encouraged to extend their stays overnight/s. The challenge is to ensure that such gains can be achieved with minimum disruption to the environment, to the amenity of the local area, and to its community. The Region's greatest range of opportunities for development of recreation and tourism facilities are within the Yarra Valley. However there is a need to carefully plan and coordinate the development of these facilities, to ensure that the Region's most valued assets - its environmental and landscape qualities - are maintained. This Strategy adopts a positive approach. It integrates environmental objectives with economic and social goals, by encouraging the tourist industry to develop with themes compatible with environmental protection, and by creating jobs for local people. 67. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM The Strategy recognises that the industry will be seeking a high degree of amenity, and that the way the Region presents itself will determine the degree of success of the enterprise, and influence the extent of preservation of some of the Region's most important features. 16.02 Regional Goals The regional goals for Recreation and Tourism Policy are to:  Facilitate further development of the Region's recreation and tourist attractions and facilities, whilst protecting the environment, the landscape and the amenity of the Region and its residents.  Encourage coordination of the planning, provision and promotion of recreation and tourism facilities in the Region.  Encourage a diverse range of tourist activities and facilities in appropriate locations, consistent with identified themes.  Optimise employment and economic benefits to the Region's residents from appropriate recreation and tourism developments.  Improve the Region's competitive strengths in tourism, to encourage and provide for an increased number of local, interstate and international overnight visitors, and to increase their average length of stay in the Region.  Encourage positive attitudes amongst the Region's residents, relevant bodies and local councils towards the development of recreation and tourism in the Region, including the provision of associated education and training opportunities and to provide for public consultation.  Facilitate resolution of existing problems or deficiencies in tourism and recreation infrastructure, through coordination between Government Departments and other relevant public agencies, Councils and local tourism and recreation bodies. 16.03 General regional policies - coordination The planning, provision and promotion of recreation and tourism facilities, including those on Public Land, must be coordinated at the regional level. This is to ensure the recognition of regional and local priorities, to assist in the proper allocation of available resources, and to enable the assessment and addressing of possible impacts on the residents, landscapes and environment of the Region. The opportunity for residents to use such facilities and activities must also be considered 16.04 Protection of the environment, landscapes and resident’s amenity Wherever possible, and for all new developments, recreation and tourism activities must be conducted in appropriate locations in the Region, away from areas where the impacts of such activities could be detrimental to the area's residents or to its environmental and landscape values. 68. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM 16.05 Visitor effect on environmental capacity Visitors who do come to the Region need to be enticed to stay for longer periods and day trippers need to be diverted away from the Dandenong Ranges, to areas appropriate for tourism and recreation in the Upper Yarra Valley. This is necessary to reduce the pressures of over use on the important landscape, environmental and visitor attraction values of the Region, particularly in the Dandenong Ranges. Opportunities for recreation and tourism activities and facilities in the Upper Yarra Valley must be promoted, to increase its attractiveness as an alternative to the Dandenong Ranges. Strategies to assist in the implementation of this policy include:  promotion of short-break accommodation opportunities, as a means of spreading visitor loads, particularly in the Dandenong Ranges and other overloaded areas;  promotion of activities and facilities which entice overnight stays, such as nocturnal animal observation at the Healesville Sanctuary and Koori (Aboriginal) cultural activities at the proposed Aboriginal Cultural Centre;  development of selected wineries and vineyards as tourist attractions in the Region, which highlight the Region's viticulture and wine making industry, and the provision of information and interpretation on these activities;  development of Mt. Donna Buang as an all-season tourist destination, with an emphasis on the nearest snow-play area to Melbourne, its magnificent scenery, and the opportunity for healthy outdoor activities, provided that the adjacent Watts River and Maroondah catchment are properly protected;  development of a variety of tourist/visitor accommodation, including low-key farm holiday opportunities and associated outdoor activities;  development of attractions associated with timber getting and gold mining;  re-establishment of the historic rail service from Lilydale to Healesville, with the operation of old steam trains, and the re-development of Healesville Railway Station as an attraction featuring transportation history and related matters;  development of roadside signs in appropriate locations to guide day-trippers to other tourist locations away from the Dandenong Ranges;  development of and crafts activities related to established themes; and  establishment of restaurants, tearooms and coffee houses reflecting the hospitality trade of the area. 16.06 Recreation and tourism in Township Policy Areas The provision of recreation and tourism facilities and services in Township Policy Areas must be carried out in a manner which:  ensures that any new facilities and/or services are located and designed to be compatible with the current and future needs of local residents and visitors, and  maximises economic and other benefits to the local community, while minimising adverse impacts on the amenity of local residents, and on the area's landscape character and environment. 69. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM 16.07 Recreation and tourism in Landscape Living Policy Areas A limited range of recreational and tourist opportunities may be allowed in appropriate locations within Landscape Living Policy Areas, provided they are in keeping with and enhance the overall character of the area, and they maintain the visual, environmental quality and residential amenity of the area. 16.08 Recreation and tourism in Rural Policy Areas A diverse range of recreational and tourism opportunities are to be encouraged in appropriate locations in Rural Policy Areas provided that they are in keeping with, and enhance, the existing overall character of the area and the maintenance of rural and agricultural pursuits, visual and environmental quality and residential amenity. 16.09 Promotion of tourism and recreation The Region should be promoted for tourism and recreation through major themes, which have been identified as major strengths and which reflect the values important to the Region and its visitors. These themes include:  Lifestyle experiences, health, good living;  Rural environment (space, vistas, agriculture);  Wineries;  Natural environment (mountains, forests, rivers and streams, flora and fauna);  Major attractions (e.g. Healesville Sanctuary, Puffing Billy Railway, Upper Yarra Dam, Mt Donna Buang), and  History and Heritage (e.g. timber, gold, water, guesthouses, pioneer skills). 16.10 Tourist Routes Appropriately signed and located tourist routes should be developed as a means of informing the public and to:  assist in planning for recreation and tourism facilities;  assist in the protection of environmentally and landscape sensitive areas;  aid in interpreting the historic and cultural values of the area; and  avoid residential areas where traffic conflicts could arise. The designation of tourist routes must include consultation with Vic Roads, local Councils and, where appropriate, the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Melbourne Parks and Waterways and other relevant bodies. 16.11 Information and interpretation Tourism and recreation information and interpretation facilities for the Upper Yarra Valley and the Dandenong Ranges (including appropriate signage) need to be provided in appropriate locations, to inform visitors of the nature and location of tourism and recreation facilities and services available. 70. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM In the information provided on the Dandenong Ranges, visitors must be made aware of alternative facilities and attractions to the Dandenong Ranges in other parts of the Region. Roadside signs and other directional information, particularly those directing visitors to tourist and other attractions, should ensure that they are not a hazard to motorists, pedestrians or property, and that the important landscape, environmental and amenity values of the Region are not detrimentally affected. 16.12 Roadside facilities The planning and provision on road sides for wayside stopping places, picnic and scenic lookout points, and recreation facilities, must be carried out in a manner which causes minimal adverse impact on landscape values, Sites of Natural and Cultural Significance, traffic movements and the residents of the Region: 16.13 Tourist and visitor accommodation and related facilities Visitors to the Region, particularly overnight visitors, should be encouraged to stay longer, in order to stimulate local economies, to provide employment opportunities for local communities, and to spread the visitor loadings over longer periods of time. Councils should encourage and facilitate the provision of a range of tourist and visitor accommodation, in appropriate localities, in order to encourage tourists and visitors to stay in the Region for longer periods of time. Preference in implementing this policy should be given to, accommodation associated with other attractions; improvement or redevelopment of existing accommodation facilities, additional small scale developments, such as bed and breakfast establishments; low cost accommodation such as camping facilities; and accommodation in association with appropriately located restaurants. 16.14 Caravan parks Land which is proposed to be used for a caravan park must either be located within:  a Township Policy Area or a Rural Policy Area and be included within a zone that specifically provides for such uses; or  the townships of Warburton, Healesville and Yarra Glen, where the use may be allowed subject to a planning permit. 16.15 Tourist accommodation The use or development of land for tourist accommodation must be controlled to protect the amenity of residents and the visual and environmental capacity of the area, and to ensure consideration is given to the primary purposes of the relevant policy area for the land. To achieve this, a planning permit must be required to develop new tourist accommodation establishments. However, planning schemes may allow bed and breakfast style tourist accommodation in any policy area, without planning approval, provided that: 71. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM  it is temporary tourist accommodation provided by the resident of a dwelling;  no more than 5 tourists are accommodated at any one time;  no new building is constructed; and  specified car parking and advertising sign requirements are met. 16.16 Hotels Hotels may only be allowed within commercial or activity centres in Township Policy Areas, and must be controlled to protect the amenity of residents, and the visual and environmental quality of the area. 16.17 Restaurants Land may be used or developed for a restaurant, subject to planning permit, only where:  it is in a Township Policy Area; or  it is in a commercial or activity centre in any other policy area; or  it is used in conjunction with agriculture, natural systems, outdoor recreation facility, rural industry or winery; and  it will be designed and sited to protect the amenity of residents and the visual and environmental quality of the areas, and to achieve the primary purpose of the policy area within which the land is situated. 16.18 Roadside Stalls Land within a Rural Policy Area may be used for a roadside stall, subject to planning permit and provided that:  only primary produce normally grown on the land on which the stall is situated, including fruit, vegetables, flowers and other farm produce, is to be sold; and  the location of the roadside stall is appropriate, having regard to traffic considerations; the adequate provision of off-road car parking; and that advertising signs are designed and located so that they do not detract from the landscape character of the area. 16.19 General use and development policies for tourism and recreation facilities In order to conform with these policies, and to ensure the sustainability of environmental amenity and opportunities for recreation and tourism, any use or development for recreation or tourism purposes, which requires a planning permit, must comply with the following:  Any undesirable effects of the use or development by reason of its appearance, discharge of wastes into the environment, excessive noise or traffic generation, or the like, must be minimised and/or controlled.  The site must be both suitable for and capable of supporting the use or development.  Adequate car parking for the use or development must be provided on the site; 72. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM  Any advertisements or signs must be located and designed so that they do not detract from the landscape character or unnecessarily distract passing traffic.  The intrinsic value of existing native vegetation and its value as habitat for wildlife must be protected.  The use or development must, if within a Township Policy Area, be connected to a reticulated sewerage system or, if in any other policy area, be capable of properly treating all wastewaters and disposing of effluent within its site.  The proposed use or development must not contribute to an over-development of a particular area. 16.20 Transport modes The use of transport modes other than private motor vehicles, for recreation and tourism activities, must be encouraged in order to lessen any adverse effects on the Region's environment and residential amenity, and to reduce traffic demands on the Region's road system. 16.21 Primary purpose - Recreation and Tourism on Public Land Planning, provision and management of recreation facilities on Public Land is to be undertaken by the appropriate Government Department or public authority. The primary purpose of policies for recreation and tourism on Public Land is to manage, maintain, and where necessary, improve existing recreation and tourism facilities, and to provide additional facilities and opportunities for a variety of recreational and tourism activities, whilst ensuring that any adverse effects on natural resources, water quality, landscape, environmental character and environmental values, residential amenity and roads, are minimised. 16.22 Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area Consistent with the general recreation and tourism policies, the further provision and/or expansion of recreation or tourism facilities on Public Land in the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area must be limited. Government Departments and public authorities and Councils responsible for the management of recreation and tourism facilities within the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area, must ensure that there is generally no further provision of such facilities within this area, but at the same time, recognise the possibility for upgrading and relocating existing facilities. 16.23 Promotion of Public Land for recreation Government Departments and Public Authorities responsible for the management of recreation facilities must, when preparing management plans, make provision for the establishment or continued use of appropriate recreation facilities in the Lysterfield Lake Park and other appropriate public land areas beyond the Mount Dandenong main ridge. These plans should also provide for the publishing of brochures and other material promoting the use of these areas for suitable recreational activities. 73. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM Camping grounds and camping opportunities for bushwalkers, cyclists, kayakers and rafters should only be allowed on Public Land or in appropriate locations near linear trails or near appropriate rivers. 16.24 The Yarra River System The Yarra River and its main tributaries below the major water supply reservoirs/dams must be recognised as a special recreational feature, and encouragement must be given to the provision of opportunities, where appropriate, for a variety of recreational activities, including walking tracks, picnic areas, and access for water-based activities. The Department of Conservation Natural Resources, Melbourne Parks & Waterways, Council and other relevant public agencies, in consultation with Council, must review and coordinate the use of water frontages in the Yarra River catchment within the Region. 16.25 Disused Lilydale-Warburton Railway Reserve Staged development of the Lilydale-Warburton Railway Reserve and other disused railway reserves for walking, cycling, horse riding and other compatible activities will be encouraged, without prejudice to the possible future use of these reserves for transport purposes if required. Government Departments and Public Authorities which own/control and manage the disused Lilydale - Warburton Railway Reserve must support the implementation of, and give effect to, the `Lilydale-Warburton Railway Reserve Recreation Management Plan July 1988' when considering works or undertakings on the Reserve or when considering the disposal of any land which is part of, or associated with, this Railway Reserve. 16.26 Disused Lilydale-Healesville Railway Reserve Government Departments and Public Authorities which own/control and manage the Lilydale-Healesville Railway must, should this railway not be re-established as a commuter rail service, assist in the development of a strategy for its use as a `tourist' railway. The use of the railway reserve for purposes other than a commuter rail service or a `tourist' railway, may be allowed only when such use is compatible with the protection of the reserve's potential for use as a linear recreation reserve (similar to the Lilydale- Warburton Railway). 16.27 Linear Recreation Opportunities The development of a regional system of walking, horse riding and bicycle tracks, in a variety of landscapes connecting townships and other private land with Public Land, must be encouraged and coordinated. In planning and developing recreation facilities and systems within the Region, Government Departments, public authorities, Councils and other agencies responsible for the management of those recreation facilities and systems must consider the approved recommendations of the Land Conservation Council, and must have regard to: 74. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - RECREATION AND TOURISM  the possibility of including disused linear features such as the Silvan aqueduct, disused railway reserves, road reserves, stream reserves and utility easements to create a network of walking, horse riding and bicycle tracks throughout the Region;  where appropriate, the feasibility of leasing private land for purposes of linear linkages with Public Land;  the need for such facilities, and their integration with existing facilities in particular locations, and  the effects on local residents, on the environment, and on the landscape of the area in which any such facility is to be situated. 75. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES 17. WATER RESOURCES 17.01 Regional Overview A major part of the Region, is used for water harvesting purposes. The Yarra River System upstream of YeringGorge and parts of Thomson Forest areusedas watersupply catchments fortheMelbournemetropolitanarea,MorningtonPeninsulaandtheRegion. Maintenance of high water quality for domestic and other beneficial uses and maintenance of environmental values are primary objectives, and the policies in this section have been developed specifically to achieve that objective. As most of the Region is used as a catchment for Melbourne's water supply the policies reflect this importance. The policies of the Regional Strategy Plan have been prepared on the basis of a total catchment approach to water resource conservation. Policies in this section concentrate on the waterways and adjacent lands and on issues specifically related to water harvesting. River systems, including floodplains, are of particular significance because of their role in transferring water in times of flood, the habitat they provide for flora and fauna, and the recreational opportunities they offer. The Yarra River and its tributary streams and creeks arewidelyrecognisedas ariversystem withspecial values. Policies for Water Resources and the Yarra River System are included under the followingheadings, andrelatetoMapSeries 4:  WaterHarvestingPolicies,whichdesignatethelandareas forwaterharvesting;  Water Quality Policies, which indicate the standards for water quality objectives and specifylandusepractices conducivetomaintenanceofhighwater quality;  Water Supply Policies, which specify the priorities for reticulated water supply systems; and  River and Stream Management Policies, which propose co-ordinated approaches for stream management generally and for the Yarra River and its tributaries inparticular. 17.02 Water Resources Goals Theregional goals forthewaterresourcepolicies areto:  ensure that the forested catchments used for water production continue to be usedsolelyorprimarilyforthis purposeandmaintainthis potential;  ensure that all local water supply catchments identified in Map 4 continue to be usedsolelyorprimarilyforthis purposeandmaintainthis potential;  ensure that the catchment of the Yarra River above Yering Gorge retains the potential forwatercollectionforpotablepurposes; 76. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES  ensure that water catchments outside the Yarra River catchment retain the potential toharvest watersuitableforvarious defineduses;  achieve the water quality objectives as specified by State Environment ProtectionPolicies;  protect, as far as possible, existing water quality and yield in those catchments subject tochanges inlanduseorlandmanagement;  minimise harmful environmental effects when the collection, harvesting, transportingandusingofwateris undertaken; and  promote the use of off-stream water storages in preference to on-stream storages in order to maintain stream flows and to reduce environmental impact on flora andin-stream fauna. Water Harvesting 17.03 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the water harvesting policies is to maintain the opportunity for high water quality harvesting for domestic and other beneficial uses from the Yarra Riverandothercatchments withintheRegion. 17.04 Melbourne Water Catchments All catchments, storages, diversion, and transfer works under the control of Melbourne Water except for those areas already used and managed by Melbourne Water, may continuetobeusedandmanagedsolelyforwaterharvestingandproductionpurposes. Catchment management measures undertaken by Melbourne Water should ensure that conservation and environmental values of these catchments are recognised and protected. Any expansion of recreational activities, particularly at Sugarloaf Reservoir, must be carefullymonitored byMelbourne Water, in order to protect both the catchment and the surroundingenvironment. 17.05 Local Catchments All local water supply catchments may continue to be used for water harvesting purposes, as required. On the advice of the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, planning authorities and Melbourne Water must carefully control uses and activities within local catchments, which may have detrimental effects on water quality andyields. Water Quality 17.06 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the water quality policies is to ensure that all land uses are managed in a manner compatible with water quality objectives as determined by the Government inStateEnvironment ProtectionPolicies. 77. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES 17.07 Regional Policy All land uses and development of Public and private land must be managed so as to maintain water quality objectives for the Region as determined by the Government in StateEnvironment ProtectionPolicies. 17.08 Timber harvesting in closed catchments Timber may only be harvested in Melbourne Water's closed catchments as a management tool for maintenance of water yields and/or quality, as part of forest hydrologyexperiments ortosalvagefiredamagedtimber. 17.09 Land use management All land use and development within the Yarra River catchment upstream of Yering Gorge must be carried out in accordance with the need to maintain and improve water qualityandyields forpotablepurposes. In addition to the specific land use controls and provisions contained in other policies of the Regional Strategy Plan, Government Departments, Public Authorities, Councils and planningauthorities must ensurethe:  containment ofurbangrowth;  provision of appropriate waste water management facilities to all residential, commercial andindustrial development;  provision for special policy areas along significant watercourses, where appropriate, and the protection of all watercourses and their environs against inappropriateuse;  promotion of good agricultural resource management techniques on rural lands, in order to protect the soil and water resources, including attention to the responsible use and application of fertilisers and biocides, cultivation techniques andtherecyclingofwastewater;  delineation, where appropriate, of land liable to flooding and specification of suitablelanduses;  maintenance of adequate stream flow to ensure protection of the biota and the aestheticqualityoftheYarraRiverandstream system;  retention of riparian vegetation and the protection of the aquatic environment, andappropriaterevegetationoftheseareas;  sympathetic design of buildings, roads and other infrastructures, the employment of sensitive development practices to minimise run-off and the prompt revegetation and stabilisation of disturbed surfaces, in order to minimise run-off anderosion; and  revegetation with appropriate native species of denuded and degraded stream banks, andenhancement oftheexistingnativevegetationalongwatercourses. 78. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES Water Supply 17.10 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of thewatersupplypolicies is toensurecontinuationofsupplyof highqualitydomesticwaterfortheMelbournemetropolitanareaandtheRegion. 17.11 Water Reticulation Investment in new or improved reticulated water supply systems must be directed to serve Township Policy Areas, Landscape Living Policy Areas and designated Special Study Areas and must be co-ordinated with the provision of waste water management facilities andmust recognisetheneedforfirefightingpurposes. River Management 17.12 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the river and stream management policies is to provide for co-ordinated multi-purpose management of each of the stream systems in the Region, to ensureefficient useofresources andtoprotect theriparianenvironment. 17.13 Coordination policy The Yarra River and its tributaries in the Region must be recognised as a single system withmultiplefunctions, andits management must beco-ordinated. Further research into the Yarra River and its tributaries, particularly the Yarra Valley wetlands, including measures for protection and rehabilitation of natural habitats and systems, shouldbeencouraged. 17.14 Multiple use of streams and waterways Other than those waterways in catchments managed by Melbourne Water, all streams and waterways must be managed to retain the potential for multiple use and take account of water harvesting requirements, demands for recreation, environmental protectionandenhancement ofcultural values andlandscapeaesthetics. Government Departments and public authorities responsible for river and catchment management areencouragedto:  liaise and share information to ensure consistent and co-ordinated policies and management for water resources, environmental protection and enhancement, anduseofwaterways; and  recognise that rivers, streams and watercourses within the Region are natural ecosystems, which must be used and managed so as to ensure that their ecological processes, native species and features of scientific, cultural or scenic significanceareprotectedandenhanced. Relevant river and catchment management authorities must be encouraged to implement policies which will ensure the co-ordinated multi-purpose use of rivers and streams withintheRegion,consistent withtheRegional StrategyPlan. 79. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS 18. SERVICE NETWORKS 18.01 Regional Overview Service networks are used to provide utility services, such as reticulated sewerage, electricity, pipelines for water and gas, and telecommunication installations. The main regional concerns regardingservicenetworks arethepossiblegrowth-inducingeffects of additional services, and the possible detrimental impact of any new network development onthenatural andcultural environment. TheRegional StrategyPlanrecognises that afull rangeofreticulatedservices is required in Township Policy Areas if the environmental resources of the area are to be maintained, and that the provision of these services must be coordinated for efficiency purposes andinrecognitionoftheenvironmental andotherneeds oftheRegion. The Ash Wednesdaybushfires have made the communityaware of concerns for the way reticulated power is supplied, and the maintenance implications of that choice. Maintaining clearance between trees and other vegetation and powerlines is necessary for public safety, and the manner in which that is achieved must recognise not only the costs, but also the alternatives tothemethodofprovidingpowerinthat location,bearing in mind the long term need to protect the environmental and landscape character of the area. There must be greater encouragement given to the increased use of underground cables forthesupplyandreticulationofelectricity. 18.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the service networks policies is to ensure that the provision of appropriate and adequate utility services and that the future development of service networks is compatible with the level ofdevelopment specifiedbytheRegional Strategy Plan, and that the environmental values of the Region are protected from inappropriate location,constructionandmaintenanceofthosenetworks. 18.03 Regional Objectives Theregional objectives forservicenetworks andutilityservices areto:  ensure that the planning, construction and maintenance of reticulated services and service networks is carried out in a way that protects the environmental and landscapevalues oftheRegion;  ensurethat theprovisionofreticulatedservices andservicenetworks aredirected towards providing for planned communities, in a manner that minimises speculativedemandforunplannedgrowth; and  facilitate the provision of a full and integrated range of reticulated services in TownshipPolicyAreas. 80 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS 18.04 Primary Purpose - Utility Services The planning, design and construction of utility services, and the timing of their installation, must be consistent with the maintenance of environmental features, must aim to minimise the effect on the landscapes of the Region, and must not conflict with theimplementationofpolicies aimedat containingurbangrowth. 18.05 Regional Policies - Utility Services All works and undertakings carried out (or proposed to be carried out) by any Government Department, public authority or Council must, unless otherwise provided byspecific policies in this Regional StrategyPlan, complywith the policies which apply to the use and development of land of the policy area within which such works or undertakings areproposedtobecarriedout. Utilityservices must be located to protect vegetation in road reserves and in other linear features. Themaintenanceofexistingutilityservices andeasements must beundertaken in such a waythat anyexisting or potentiallyadverse visual or environmental effects are minimised. When planning, designing or allocating expenditure for new or improved utility services, it must be demonstrated that such schemes principally serve Township Policy Areas, do not have a development-inducing effect outside those areas, and do not have a detrimental impact ontheenvironment orlandscapeoftheRegion. 18.06 Management of utility services Government Departments, public authorities and Councils must have regard to the followingwhenplanningandmanagingworks andundertakings withintheRegion:  The need to limit the removal or pruning of trees to the minimum necessary for public safety and in such a way as to minimise any adverse visual and environmental effects.  Where tree clearingis considered essential for thelocationofservices, it must be accompanied by removal of the resulting large debris to reduce the immediate visual impact of the operation, and by the replanting of appropriate indigenous nativespecies tolessentheimpact oftheworks.  Before any earthworks are carried out, soil and leaf litter from indigenous species must be saved for respreading later as part of the necessaryrehabilitation andreplantingcomponent ofanyworks proposal;  Siting of new minor utility services in a manner which minimises the visual and environmental effects of such services. In especially sensitive areas, consideration must be given to the undergrounding of services where this will result inless visual orenvironmental impact.  Locating major and intermediate utility services, including overhead and underground services, to protect the landscape and environmental character of the Region. Transmission line poles, towers and conductors of improved design andlowvisual impact must beused. 81 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS  Giving priority in the rehabilitation and enhancement of existing utility services to those services that have a major adverse effect on the landscape and/or the environment oftheRegion.  Using irregular clearing patterns along easements or roads within which utility services arelocated.  In anyabove ground facility, non-reflective materials and colour tones which are in sympathy with the landscape within which the facilityis to be situated should be used, and locating all above ground facilities awayfrom ridge lines and other sensitivelandscapes orenvironments.  Revegetating (with indigenous species) and rehabilitating sites as part of any works proposal. New utility services must, whenever possible, be sited outside vegetated road reserves and other linear easements, and where existing utilityservices are to be reconstructed or upgraded, consideration must be given to relocating those services outside vegetated roadreserves orlineareasements. Agencies responsible for utility services must have regard to the following when planningandcarryingout maintenanceworks andactivities:  the need for revegetation (with indigenous species) of easements and road reserves withinwhichtheasset ofutilityis situated;  theuseofirregularclearingpatterns wheretreeclearingis necessary;  limiting the clearing of any trees or vegetation to a level consistent with the slope of the land, the need to prevent soil erosion, the efficient operation of the utility,andthemaintenanceoflandscapeandenvironmental values;  in anyabove ground facility, the use of non-reflective materials incolourtonings compatible with the landscape of the area within which the facility is situated; and  where existing facilities traverse visible escarpments, cross ridge lines, or otherwise obtrusively impact on the visual amenity of the area, they should be screenedbytheplantingofindigenous nativetrees andshrubs. 18.07 Public works and undertakings Government Departments, public authorities and Councils who propose to carry out works and undertakings in the Region, of the type or in the areas specified below, must obtain the approval of the relevant local Council, and must have regard to any requirements ofthat Council:  Intermediate Utility Installation (Electrical); being an electricity powerline or substation operating at a voltage of more that 22,000 volts and less than 220,000 volts.  Major Utility Installation/Major Works & Undertakings; being a utility installationwhichis: · anelectricitygeneratingworks, anelectrical substationoperatingat a voltageof220,000volts ormore; 82 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS · awatersupplyreservoir,servicebasinorpumpingstation,awatersupply headworks mainorareticulatedmainwithadiameterexceeding300mm; · agas holder,generator,areticulationorsupplymain(includingnatural gas)withadiameterof200mm orgreater; · asewagetreatment plant orsewagestorageponds andtanks receiving sewagefrom areticulatedsystem,seweragemains withadiametergreater than300mm,sewerageplant outfalls; · garbageandrefusedisposal works; · oil pipelinewithadiameterof100mm orgreater; or · afloodretardingbasin,floodmitigationworks orthelike.  Educational facility; being a new, or the extension of an existing, educational facility (whether it be public or private), including a primary school, secondary/ highcollegeandtertiaryinstitution.  Rivers, watercourses and streams; being any works or undertakings relating to utility services within any river, stream or watercourse - or on the banks or within30m ofthebanks ofanyriver,stream orwatercourse.  Telecommunication Facility; being buildings, masts, towers and the like associated with telecommunications (radio, television, microwave transmission/ receiving,etc).  All works andundertakings inthefollowingareas: · Mt DandenongRidgeArea. · PuffingBillyRailwayPrimaryScenicCorridor. · Withinoradjacent toaSiteofCultural Significance. · WithinaSiteofNatural Significance. · Withinalandscapeorarea‘classified’or‘recorded’bytheNational Trust ofAustralia(Victoria). 18.08 Works and undertakings associated with the supply of electricity In addition to any other requirement of the Regional Strategy Plan, electricity supply authorities must consult withtherelevant local Council duringtheplanningoftheworks and undertakings of the type or in the areas specified below, and must have regard to any requirements of that Council and must ensure that the works or undertakings are in conformitywiththeRegional StrategyPlan:  All works and undertakings associated with the keeping of electricity lines and assets clear of trees and other vegetation, unless such works are low voltage supply improvements and/or extensions (both over-head lines and underground cable);  Maintenance programs for routine tree trimming and removal must be in accordance with the ‘Code of Practice for Tree Clearing’, and where necessary, special attention (in accordance with the Code of Practice) must be given to 83 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS botanically, historically or aesthetically significant stands of trees, and to trees within or adjacent to National Trust of Australia (Victoria) ‘classified’ or ‘recorded’landscapes.  Within any area ‘declared’ under Clause 9 of the Code of Practice for Tree Clearing, as an ‘Area of Particular Significance’ (for the Dandenong Ranges or anyotherareasubsequently‘declared’). In consulting on any works or undertakings, the electricity supply authority must advise of:  the nature of the works proposed and the objective to be achieved by those works;  the extent of tree/vegetation trimming and removal required for the works, based on the ‘Code of Practice’, for both a three year and a one year return period for clearinglines ofthosetrees/vegetation,and  alternative alignments and/or construction methods (including underground cable and aerial bundled cable) which would achieve the objective sought bythe works, andtheimplications (includingcosts)ofthosealternatives. 18.09 Removal of overhead powerlines from the Dandenong Ranges (North and Western faces) The adverse visual effects and the potential fire ignition hazards caused by overhead power lines located on the western and north-western faces of the Dandenong Ranges must beamelioratedandtheremust benofurtheroverheadlines constructedinthis area. As a long term policy, the electricity supply authorities must plan for the removal or undergrounding of all power lines on the western and north western faces of the Dandenong Ranges, so as to remove potential fire ignition hazards and to enhance the important landscapevalues ofthearea. The power line presently on the western face of the Dandenong Ranges between Glasgow Road and Ridge Road must be relocated andthepresent easement rehabilitated andrevegetatedwithindigenous vegetation. 18.10 Wastewater management Planning for the provision of reticulated sewerage throughout the Region must be coordinated between the Environment Protection Authority, Councils and the drainage, water and sewerage provision authorities and must be coordinated with the provision of reticulatedwaterservices. Where a reticulated sewerage system is not provided, all wastes emanating from the use or development of land must be capable of being treated on that land, with the effluent beingeithercontainedwithinthelandordisposedoftoanapproveddischargepoint. When proposing and planning reticulated sewerage schemes, the servicing agency must ensurethat suchschemes arelocatedtoprimarilyserveTownshipPolicyAreas. 84 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS Reticulated waste water management systems, for policy areas other than Township Policy Areas, may be provided only where the servicing agency has demonstrated that the:  existing waste water management techniques are havingadverse effects on water quality and that sewerage is needed to remove or avoid adverse effects on the environment ofthearea;  use of various on-site treatment and disposal systems has been investigated for the proposed area and would be inadequate or unnecessarily costly, or have an adverseimpact ontheenvironment ofthearea; and  planning, design and construction of the preferred system is consistent with the objectives ofthePolicyArea/s withinwhichtheproposal is tobelocated. Refuse Disposal 18.11 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the refuse disposal policies is to ensure that all refuse disposal sites will be established and operated in a manner which protects the environment and landscapes of the Region, and which provides for the consideration of a regional approach to waste disposal as a means of reducing the adverse impacts of such activities. 18.12 Regional policy - refuse disposal The establishment of new, and the extension of existing, refuse disposal sites must be determined in accordance with the need to protect the Region's residential amenity, its environment,andits landscapevalues. The operation of refuse disposal sites must be in accordance with the requirements of the Environment Protection Act and the Health Act. When a refuse disposal site has reached its capacity, or is no longer required for that purpose, it must be rehabilitated to becompatiblewiththesurroundingareas. When formulating proposals for extensions to existing refuse disposal sites, or selection of new sites, consideration must be given to adopting an approach to waste disposal which involves the cooperation of the Councils in the Region. Such an approach will need to recognise the role of the Outer Eastern Refuse Disposal Group or similar organisation. In determining whether the development and operation of a proposed refuse disposal siteis appropriate,regardmust behadtothefollowing:  the proximityof theproposedsitetoresidential areas andthelikelyimpact ofthe useonthoseresidential areas;  the existence, or the ability to provide, vegetation which will create visual screening of the proposed site from adjacent areas and the need to protect and reinforcesuch screenplanting;  theneedtoprovideforadequatefireprotectionandprevention; 85 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS  the intended method, and its adequacy, of preventing groundwater and surface waterpollution;  the provision ofall-weathervehicularaccess andthemannerinwhichtrafficwill access the site and the need to provide adequate management of that traffic so that there is not an adverse impact on adjacent and other affected roads, land users andresidents;  the extent of tree and vegetation removal required and the likely impact of that removal onthesiteandadjoiningareas;  preventingadverse effects of dust,smell,noiseandotherimpacts onsurrounding areas andtheeffects ofprevailingwindpatterns; and  theneedtoprovidefortherecyclingofwasteproducts. 18.13 Regional policy - Telecommunication facilities Telecommunication facilities must be located and constructed in a manner which protects the landscapes of the Region. Proponents for new, and for the extension and maintenance of existing, telecommunications facilities within the Region must demonstrate that adverse visual and environmental effects will not occur from the development,use,extensionormaintenanceofthosefacilities. Any proposal for the establishment of, or extension to, a telecommunication facility, or any proposal for a telecommunication works and undertaking for a Government Department,PublicAuthorityorCouncil,must demonstratethat:  thereis aneedforthefacilityat theparticularlocation;  joint usecannot bemadeofotherexistingfacilities;  the visual impact of the proposed facility will not adversely affect the landscape ofthearea;  the use of non-reflective materials, in subdued colour tonings, is made whenever possible;  theusewill bemadeofirregularclearingpatterns, whereclearingis required;  clearing of trees/vegetation is limited to a level consistent with the slope of the land, the need to prevent soil erosion, the need to protect and enhance the environmental andlandscapevalues ofthearea,andtheefficient operationofthe utility;  revegetation and rehabilitation of sites will occur after the works are completed (andas part oftheworks contract);  the location of facilities upon highly visible escarpments or upon ridge lines is avoided; and  any obtrusive impacts of proposed facilities on the visual amenity of the area (such as where they traverse escarpments or cross ridgelines) are reduced by the plantingofvegetationscreens. 86 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SERVICENETWORKS 18.14 Telecommunication facilities in the Dandenong Ranges The significant landscape character of the Dandenong Ranges must be protected and enhanced when consideration is being given to the siting, design and construction of telecommunications towers, masts orfacilities. Although it is recognised that the continued presence of the existing four towers at Mt. Dandenong is currentlynecessaryfor communications purposes, the opportunitya multi tower system gives for proper maintenance, upgrading and possible future replacement, must beconsidered. No additional telecommunications towers or masts may be constructed within the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area, and when replacement or reconstruction of an existing tower or mast is proposed, the agency, person or body proposing those works must demonstrate that consolidation of the facilities on another existing tower cannot be satisfactorily achieved. 87 REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT 19. TRANSPORT 19.01 Regional Overview The transport policies are formulated to assist the improvement of roads and public transport fortheRegion's residents andvisitors, whileminimisinganyadverseeffects on the Region's environment. The policies are also designed to have regard to other State Government strategies for transport improvements within and adjacent to metropolitan Melbourne. The Region's major road network andits publictransport system servetwodistinct areas of population, a southern sector covering the southern part of the Dandenong Ranges and the much larger northern sector including the Yarra Valleyand northern Dandenong Ranges. The major arterial roads in the southern sector are the Burwood Highway, Mt. Dandenong Tourist Road and the Belgrave-Gembrook Road. This sector's public transport needs are served primarily by a commuter rail link from Melbourne to Belgrave,supplementedbybus services linkingtherailwaystations. In the northern sector, major arterial roads include Canterbury/Swansea Roads, the Maroondah Highway, the Melba Highways and the Warburton Highway. There is a commuter rail service from Melbourne to Lilydale and Mooroolbark. The rail service is complemented by a network of local bus services, mainly radiating from Lilydale railway station to the smaller townships along the main connecting highways and arterial roads. Parts of the Region's arterial road system are experiencing increasing traffic pressures at peak times, leading to demands for more road space and safety improvements. Such increased traffic has resulted from the combined effects of a substantial population growth, which is now expected to peak in the mid 1990s; many residents having to travel long distances towards Melbourne and its eastern suburbs for employment, post- secondaryeducation and major shopping trips; and the growingnumbers of dayvisitors whoat weekends andpublicholidays access theRegionforrecreationandtourism. In a large Region with much of its population living in scattered semi-rural areas and township fringes, many residents are completely reliant on the private motor car. Adequate public transport options are available only to those who live close to railway stations and who wish to travel to destinations towards Central Melbourne, for whom services are generally very regular and operate till late at night and at weekends. For most residents, however,thepublictransport options arelimited. The Regional Strategy Plan's policies seek improved coordination and integration of a public transport system which provides better services for those without a motor vehicle. In recognition of the difficulties of justifying conventional public transport services in sparsely populated areas, they also encourage the development of demand/response services and other measures for improving access to services and facilities formoreoftheRegion's residents. 88. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT 19.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the transport policies is to ensure that opportunities for increased accessibilityto employment and to the Region's services and facilities byboth road and public transport are enhanced, that the road network is managed in accordance with agreed principles for its maintenance, improvement and efficient use, that road management strategies are adopted which minimise adverse social, environmental and landscape impacts, and that road reserves are managed and maintained as scenic and flora/faunaconservationresources. 19.03 Coordination of transport Planning for, and the provision of, roads and public transport in the Region must be coordinated to meet the needs of the Region's residents and for visitors to the Region, in a manner consistent with conservation and environmental values, and the containment ofurbangrowthpolicies as expressedintheRegional StrategyPlan. 19.04 Road management policies The management of existingroads, andtheplanningandestablishment offutureroading improvements must becoordinatedinordertoensurethat:  the function requirements of roads in the Region are met in a manner that does not result in adverse impacts on the environment, landscape or residents of the Region;  the strategic roles of major routes in the Region, that are identified in the Road ClassificationNetwork(Map5),arerecognised;  proper assessment of future major roading proposals occur in a manner that includes an evaluation of alternative proposals/alignments (including the option of not doing the works), of the likely environmental impacts of the proposals (including alternatives), and of the social and economic impacts likely to result from the proposals, so that appropriate reservations can be established and protected from inappropriate uses and development, for future major roading provisions, linkages andby-passes;  tourist buses and other very large vehicles are directed away from roads where their use would cause undue and adverse effects on residential amenity and on local environments. 19.05 Road improvements In planning for road improvements, and in preparing road management strategies, Councils and other relevant public authorities and Government Departments must ensurethat:  there is consultation at an early stage in the planning process for road improvements and road management strategies so as to ensure that the proposals will conform withtheRegional StrategyPlan;  road reservations for new alignments must be included in planning schemes whenafinal routehas beendetermined; 89. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT  planning authorities designate roads in planning schemes consistent with the RoadClassificationNetwork(Map5);  planning authorities have regard to the Land Use and Traffic Management Guidelines for Roads (Schedule 4), when considering types of land uses to be permittedalongroads; and  in developing new road proposals, Councils, public authorities and other relevant bodies consider the needs of cyclists and pedestrians and the possible provisionofbicyclepaths. 19.06 Strategic and arterial roads and long term roading proposals Public Authorities and Councils must take appropriate action to ensure that the planning for and the provision, management and maintenance of roads are in accordance with the Road Classification Network (Map 5), with the Land Use and Traffic Management Guidelines forRoads, andwiththestrategicroles ofthefollowingroads:  Maroondah Highway(to Coldstream) and Melba Highwayas the major highway route through the Region, with a high priorityfor theprovisionofalocal by-pass oftheYarraGlenTownship;  Maroondah Highway(beyond Coldstream) as the main access to Healesville and thetourist and winegrowingareas ofthat part oftheUpperYarraValley;  Warburton Highway as the main access route through the Upper Yarra Valley forresidents andtourist traffic;  Healesville - Koo Wee Rup Road as the main north-south arterial route through theRegion;  Canterbury Road and the Lilydale-Montrose Road (Swansea Road) as a major traffic link between the eastern metropolitan suburbs and the Maroondah Highwayat Lilydale; and  Burwood Highway, Wellington Road, CanterburyRoad, Mt. Dandenong Tourist Road, Monbulk Road and the Eltham-Yarra Glen Road as major supplementary routes formetropolitanrecreational andtourist trafficintotheRegion. Relevant Public Authorities and planning authorities must cooperate to investigate, evaluate and make provision for the following long term roading proposals, which must beinconformitywiththeRegional StrategyPlan:  a Northern Arterial route linking Melbourne's northern urban fringe municipalities andterminatingintheRegion;  the proposed "Healesville Freeway" route from Springvale Road through Heathmont, Bayswater and Kilsyth to Mooroolbark Road, including the roading requirements foraccess toandthedispersal oftrafficfrom,the`freeway';  alocal by-pass oftheHealesvilletownship; and  provision of a connecting route from Lilydale-Montrose Road (Swansea Road) to the Warburton Highway at Wandin North, generally along the alignment of York,MonbulkandCleggRoads. 90. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT 19.07 Protection of environmental and social values The planning, design and construction of all roadworks and road maintenance must be undertaken in ways which minimise possible adverse impacts on the Region's social and physical environments andlandscape,so that:  adverse effects on local communities, suchas noise,safety,andinterferencewith pedestrianmovement,areminimised;  emphasis is generally given to road maintenance and improvements for safety purposes, which are consistent with traffic requirements, rather than attempting toincreaseoverall vehiclespeedand/orcapacitycharacteristics;  for local roads within Township and Landscape Living Policy Areas, consideration is given to imaginative street and pathway schemes which make these roads safe and attractive, which maintain and enhance the character of the local environment, which provide safe and convenient bus stop bays, and which provide, where appropriate, for the integration of bicycle paths serving transport and/orotherrecreational functions;  the landscape and environmental character of roadsides is preserved, and where possible enhanced, by the maintenance of roadside vegetation, and by designing newroadworks toblendwithsurroundinglandforms;  roadsides are rehabilitated as part of any roadworks, by replacing brush and topsoil (stockpiled before the works) and spreadingthese over batter slopes, and, where appropriate, planting with trees, shrubs and grasses in keeping with the characterofthesurroundingarea;  the scenic and recreational values of roadsides are recognised, and appropriate locations, whichcanprovidehighqualityvistas without significant loss trees and vegetation,aremadeaccessibletothepublic;  the design and location of all signage, including information and direction signs, are compatible with local surroundings havingregardtotraffic,safetyandvisitor requirements, andcauseminimal adverseimpact onthelandscape; and  the alignment and level of any new road construction does not significantly increase the level of local flooding or cause significant adverse effects on water quality; Councils and other relevant Public Authorities, and having regard to the needs of local communities, are encouraged to prepare management guidelines for the minimising of adverse impacts on the Region's social and physical environments and landscapes, causedbyroadworks andbyroadsidesigns. 19.08 Significant Roadworks The following roads are of special significance in the Region because of their importance for their landscape, environmental, tourism, recreational or traveller experience values, which must be given particular attention when road improvement works arebeingplanned. With the exception of routine pavement and drainage maintenance, and pavement reconstruction and resealing where there is no widening or realignment involved, 91. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT Government Departments, Public Authorities and Councils who propose to carry out works and undertakings on the following roads must consult with the relevant local Council during the planning of those works, and must have regard to any requirements of that Council, and must ensure that the works or undertakings are in conformity with theRegional StrategyPlan: MaroondahHighway BurwoodHighway MelbaHighway WarburtonHighway Myers CreekRoad,northoftheWatts River. Healesville-KooWeeRupRoad CanterburyRoad Lilydale-MontroseRoad(SwanseaRoad) Healesville-KinglakeRoad. DonRoad,southofBadgerWeirRoad. WellingtonRoad Eltham-YarraGlenRoad CambridgeRoad YorkRoad CleggRoad Inverness Road Mt.DandenongTourist Road Olinda-MonbulkRoad Olinda-BasinRoad Lilydale-MonbulkRoad EdinburghRoad Belfast Road RidgeRoad(Mt.Dandenong/Olinda) KillaraRoad GrantullaRoad Belgrave-GembrookRoad Sassafras CreekRoad/TheCrescent Emerald-MonbulkRoad GlenfernRoad MonbulkRoad Macclesfield-YellingboRoad SherbrookeRoad MountainHighway Perrins CreekRoad Kallista-EmeraldRoad RidgeRoad(Kallista) LysterfieldRoad DonRoad(WarburtonHighwaytoPantonGap) AcheronWay Marysville-Woods Point Road Warburton-Woods Point Road YarraJunction-NoojeeRoad LaunchingPlace-GembrookRoad Mt.DonnaBuangRoad(WarburtontoPantonGap) 19.09 Roads and roadworks in the Dandenong Ranges All roads androadworks intheMt.DandenongRidgeAreamust:  be planned, designed, constructed and maintained so as to recognise the roadside vegetation, landscape, environment and views as assets to be protected and enhanced, to preserve the aesthetic experience for the tourist (driver, passenger, rider and walker), whilst providing safe travel conditions and minimising adverseimpacts onlocal communities.  generallybeconfinedwithintheexistingformationwidths oftheroad; and  provideatrafficcapacityrestraint inareas ofhightrafficload. Roadworks within this area must be undertaken in such a way that the non urban character of the area is maintained and that kerb and channel, channelisation and street lighting(otherthanforpedestrianpurposes)areusedonlywherenecessary. 92. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT 19.10 Roads in Rural Policy Areas and Landscape Living Policy Areas Roadworks within Rural Policy Areas and Landscape Living Policy Areas, outside the Mt. Dandenong Ridge Area, must be carried out in a manner which maintains the existing road network, which recognises the need for multiple-use of road reserves, and whichprotects andenhances thelandscapeandenvironmental values ofthearea. 19.11 Public Land Roads Roadworks within Public Land Policy Areas must be undertaken in a manner which ensures that the character of the existing road network and its compatibility with adjoining land is maintained, and that the landscape and environmental values of Public Landareprotectedandenhanced. Public Authorities must haveregardtotherequirements ofthis policyandtothepolicies that apply to roadworks in Rural and Landscape Living Policy Areas when formulating proposals forroadworks onPublicLand. Roadworks in Public Land Policy Areas must conform with the requirements for roadworks intheMt DandenongRidgeArea,except forthosethat relateto:  construction of access tracks for fire prevention and for the maintenance of services byserviceagencies;  maintenance of the road pavement and drainage facilities within the limits defined by table drains and/ or formation shoulders, including the pruning of overhanging vegetation to the minimum compatible with safety and in such a wayas tominimiseanyadversevisual effects;  provision of minor traffic items such as lane marking or signs relating to the operationandconstructionofaroad; and  snowclearing. 19.12 Public Transport - General Policies To ease problems of accessibility and to assist in the conservation of fuel, public transport services and facilities in the Region must be maintained, and where possible improved,tomeet theneeds ofpublictransport users, includingas appropriate:  extensionofpublictransport services;  integrationofbus andrail schedules;  improved car parking provisions and other interchange facilities at railway stations;  provisionofbetterpublictransport informationsystems; and  promotion aimed towards improved patronage of existing bus, rail and other publictransport services. 93. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - TRANSPORT 19.13 Coordination of Public Transport Public transport authorities and Government Departments, when planning and programming public transport services and facilities, must consult with Councils and otherrelevant publicauthorities andmust giveparticularattentionto:  the establishment and/or continued operation of modal interchanges within the Lilydale District Centre and at a suitable location in the Upper Ferntree Gully area, ensuring that the existing level of train service to Belgrave is not jeopardised;  the improvement of existing public transport services in Township PolicyAreas, andtheextensionofthoseservices toareas not adequatelyservedat present;  an investigation of the feasibility and viability of demand-responsive schemes (such as Telebus), and, where appropriate, a review of the existing subsidy provisions to provide for continued operation and expansion of such schemes in thefuture;  incorporation of bus route planning input into the preparation of Local Structure Plans in Township Policy Areas, or of overall structure plans for other new areas, and ensuring careful design of new subdivisions and development proposals; and  investigation of options for improvement to commuter services to Yarra Glen, HealesvilleandtotheUpperYarraValley. 19.14 Aircraft Landing Areas and Aerodromes Further provision or expansion of Authorised Landing Areas or the creation of Licensed Aerodromes in the Region must be discouraged, and operators and users of existing Authorised Landing Areas must be encouraged to enhance the amenity and safety for residents in the vicinityof thoseAuthorisedLandingAreas byimplementingappropriate controls on the use of these facilities, especially with respect to such matters as aircraft weight andtype,flyingtraining,hours ofoperation,andlowaltitudeflyingpractice. Planning authorities must ensure that the use, development or expansion of Authorised Landing Areas and/or Licensed Aerodromes is subject to a planning approval and to conditions which control the use of these facilities, especially with respect to such matters as aircraft weight and type, flying training, hours of operation, and low altitude flyingpractice. 94. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - FIREMANAGEMENT 20. FIRE MANAGEMENT 20.01 Introduction The Region is recognised as being among one of the most fire prone areas in the world. In manyparts of the Region, and in particular the Dandenong Ranges, there is a conflict between the need to minimise wildfire risk and the desire of people to live in a bushland environment. In such areas, fire prevention work, including vegetation removal, must bebalancedwiththeneedtoprotect thecharacterofthearea. Major statutory responsibility for wildfire prevention and suppression rests with the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources and the Country Fire Authority. Melbourne Water is also involved in fire prevention and suppression on land under its control. There are well established procedures for cooperation and coordination of wildfire prevention and suppression within the Region, involving Councils, police, and other emergencyservices and the Regional and Local AdvisoryCommittees established under theCountryFireAuthorityAct. Research following the disastrous fires of Ash Wednesday (in February 1982), demonstrated that further attention needs to be paid to the way that buildings are sited and constructed, and to the need for management for fire protection purposes, particularly around the home. At the same time, there is a need to more adequately refinetheways bywhichtherisk ofwildfireis identified. 20.02 Primary Purpose The primarypurpose for the fire management policies is to support the prevention and suppression of wildfire and the provision of effective fire prevention measures, whilst at the same time ensuring that detrimental effects of fire prevention works on the Region's environment, on water yields and water quality from the Region's catchments, are minimised. They are also intended to assist in informing the Region's residents and visitors of fire hazards, and the implications of these hazards for life, property, landscapeandenvironmental maintenance. 20.03 Regional policies - wildfire prevention and suppression Wildfire prevention and suppression must be coordinated, and Public Authorities, Councils andplanningauthorities must haveregardto:  theneedtoprotect life,propertyandotherresources from wildfires;  theneedforresidents andvisitors tobemadeawareofthethreat ofwildfire;  proposals foruseordevelopment infireproneareas;  the potential for detrimental environmental change which can be caused by fire preventionandfireprotectionworks; and  the preservation of native flora and fauna, wildlife habitats, water quality and wateryield,andsceniclandscapes. 95. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - FIREMANAGEMENT Wildfire prevention and suppression must continue to be provided through existing agencies andcoordinationsystems. 20.04 Fire protection management All fire protection works undertaken or authorised by Municipal and Regional Fire Prevention Committees and by Government Departments and Public Authorities must beinaccordancewithFireProtectionPlans preparedbythesebodies. Matters tobeaddressedintheFireProtectionPlans include:  theobjectives forfirepreventionandsuppression;  areas withintheRegionwhicharemost pronetoserious wildfire;  strategic and tactical firebreaks, and buffer zones adjacent to those concentrations ofpopulationwhichwouldbethreatenedbywildfire;  fireaccess roads andmaintenanceoffireaccess tracks;  watersupplypoints;  areas where frequent fuel reduction will be required, including areas where environmental and/or landscape features require restraint in fire prevention works; and  identification of bodies responsible for management of wildfire suppression and control activities. Fire prevention agencies must take special care in planning and carrying out fire preventionworks relatingto:  landwithintheMt.DandenongMainRidgearea;  landwithinthePuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor;  land within a Sites of Natural Significance or within, or in the immediate environs of,aSiteofCultural Significance;  landscapes ‘classified’ or ‘recorded’ by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria);  matters which may affect the maintenance of water quality and water yield from theRegion's catchment; and  roadsides throughout theRegion. 20.05 Fire fuel reduction methods The effects on natural eco-systems of "fuel reduction cool-burning" (particularly high frequency burning) and of "fuel reduction slashing" must be investigated by those responsible for fire management and prevention, in consultation with appropriate agencies andorganisations. Where it is shown to detrimentally affect the Region's native vegetation, fauna, wildlife habitats or water quality and water yield, the frequency and extent of burning and/or slashingmust bere-assessed. 96. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - FIREMANAGEMENT 20.06 Land required for fire management The Dandenong Ranges are a complex mosaic of natural areas and residential precincts. Theyare recognised as one of the most fire hazardous areas of the world. Various areas in the Dandenong Ranges support vegetation communities that are very inflammable and many are valued for natural characteristics. Residents live within and around these areas, and the environment that attracted them to the area can be placed at risk by their activities. At the same time, the people themselves can be threatened by that environment. It is recognised and noted that people making the decision to live and work in this fire prone environment, whereby the intensity of fire may be high during the event of a bushfire, do so at their own risk. Fire safety of residents living within the Dandenong Ranges is primarilytheresponsibilityoftheindividual todecide. In times of bushfire it must be realised by the community that the fire services cannot make a commitment to protect all life and property within the area. To cope with this situation, the Government has carried out a land purchase program for many years with theobjectiveofprotectingenvironmental resources andreducingthefirehazard. 20.07 Land purchase for fire management The Department of Conservation and Natural Resources must identify those lots the Government intends to purchase. These lots will be reserved in the local sections of planning schemes as Proposed Public Open Space to ensure that owners have appropriateprotectionoftheirinterests. The Government maypurchase other land from time to time on the open market when it becomes availableat thediscretionoftheowners. 97. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY SCHEDULE ONE STATE PLANNING POLICY FOR THE REGION FormerlyStatementof PlanningPolicyNo.3-UpperYarraValley and DandenongRanges (as varied April 1979) 1.0 The Area This Statement of Planning Policy under Part 1 of the Town and Country Planning Authority Act 1961 applies to the area of the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges and the southern foothills of those ranges shown on the map hereunder and referred to throughout as the Policy Area. The map shows also the Yarra River Catchment area,theDandenongRanges andtheirsouthernfoothills. 1.1 The Aims Statement ofPlanningPolicyNo.3aims toretainandimprove,wherepossible:  the amenity of the Policy Area for present and future residents, the farmingcommunityandotherusers;  conservationofits natural resources;  scenic and bushland environments for recreation and conservation, and  other landscapes of value as a feature of the State of Victoria, and moreparticularlytheMelbourneregion. 1.2 Statement of Planning Policy No. 3 aims to contain urban development to a scale and type compatible with conservation of the Policy Area and with high standards ofamenity. It aims at balancedplanningfor:  hamlets and townships of a nature compatible with the physical environment;  primaryproduction;  waterharvesting,storageanddiversion;  timberproduction. 2.0 The Application Planning and management of resources in the Policy Area shall take account of the interests and views of the community, both within an beyond the Policy Area. 2.1 Any net increase in the total provision for residential development in the Policy Area shall be contained within the aims of this Policy. There shall be no net increase in the total provision for residential development in the Dandenong 98. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY Ranges; and no significant increase in the Yarra Valley and the southern foothills beyond that provided for in proposals approved or exhibited at the date ofadoptionofthis Policy. 2.2 Urban development and redevelopment of existing urban areas within the Policy Areas shall be planned within a strategy to be developed by the Upper Yarra Valleyand Dandenong Ranges Authority, to promote communitywell-beingand ensurethat theaims ofthis Policyareimplemented. 2.3 The strategy shall give effect to this Policy's intent that development shall be contained, to ensure that it does not prejudice the conservation of natural resources and the amenity for those who live there, and those who visit the area forrecreation. 2.4 Natural resources worthy of conservation shall include significant vegetation, both nativeandexotic,andwildlifehabitats ofimportance. 2.5 Planningshall seektominimisebushfirerisk. 2.6 Planning for recreation shall seek to minimise any adverse effect of tourism and day-tripping on residents, existing land use and the environment; and shall ensurecompatibilitywiththeprimaryaims ofthis Policy. 2.7 Systems of public open space shall be retained and others developed, where appropriate,alongtheYarraRiverandits maintributaries. 2.8 Landscapes and scenic features shall be maintained, enhanced where appropriate,andrehabilitatedwherenecessary. 2.9 Agricultural land in non-urban zones shall generally be retained for rural pursuits. 2.10 Areas currentlyused for water supplypurposes shall be planned and managed to maintaintheiractual andpotential value. 2.11 This Policyexpresslyrecognises the option of establishing a major water storage onWatson's Creek. 2.12 Planning and management of forested areas shall be for multiple use, where compatible with the protection of water resources, water quality, forest value, landscape and nature conservation. Such multiple use may include compatible recreational activity,whereappropriate. 2.13 Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works may manage forested areas under its control solely for water supply purposes. 2.14 Land use in designated catchments within the Policy Area shall continue to be determined by the Soil Conservation Authority in consultation with planning authorities. 99. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY 2.15 Planning for the use of land shall take into account, and be compatible with Government policies for the use of public land, and with Statements of Environment ProtectionPolicy. 2.16 Recognition shall be given to present and future needs for public utility services in the PolicyArea, and adequate provision shall be made for the accommodation oftheseneeds, havingdueregardtotheaims ofthePolicy. 3.0 The Implementation In the following paragraphs "The Authority" means the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Authority in respect of that part the Policy Area under its control, and the CityofKnox andShireofPakenham inrelationtotheremaining parts ofthePolicyAreawithintherespectivemunicipalities. 3.1 This Policy requires the Authority in consultation with responsible authorities, Government departments and agencies, to develop planning strategies for the PolicyArea. This Policy, and those strategies and their intent, shall be complied with by Government departments, agencies and municipalities; and responsible authorities shall amend existing planning schemes and controls to comply with them. 3.2 The strategies shall encompass all matters pertinent to the Policy Area that fall within the aims of this Statement of Planning Policy, and shall deal with urban containment, community well-being, agriculture, conservation, recreation, water resource management, forest management, fire prevention and preservation of amenity. 3.3 Thestrategies shall takeaccount of:-  theeffects ofimplementationofPolicyaims onthelocal community;  environmental effect;  appropriatelandmanagement;  access, extent, location and ownership of suitable recreation areas both publicandprivate,andnatural resources containedtherein;  existing and potential demand for recreation facilities and the ability of givenareas tomeet suchdemandwithout detriment;  needs and preferences of the community both within and beyond the PolicyArea,and  servicingrequirements. 3.4 The Authority, in consultation with other authorities and agencies, shall evaluate the Policy Area for scenic and landscape value, recreational significance, native flora and fauna, wildlife habitats and other natural resources, and the need and desires of the people who live there. This evaluation shall aim at making appropriate provision for the maintenance and planting of trees, regulation of landclearanceandtreeremoval,andtheconservationofotherflora. 100. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY 3.5 The Authority, in consultation with other authorities and agencies, shall evaluate landscapes to identify areas of special significance, and develop general guidelines with a view to assisting public and private development towards visual compatibilitywiththeenvironments inwhichtheyarelocated. 3.6 Planning measures shall encourage farming and other rural pursuits in appropriate areas, and provide for the maintenance of natural resources and rural landscapevalues. 3.7 The Authority, and relevant departments, shall develop and apply appropriate control for the siting, extent, operation and rehabilitation of land mined by the extractiveindustry. 3.8 An urban and residential strategy shall provide guidelines for development considered appropriate, and for detailed planningof townandsettlements, define appropriate residential densities, identify areas suitable for development and establish requirements fortheprovisionofservices. 3.9 The Authority, with appropriate departments, shall evaluate existing subdivisions, and their capacityto be developed without significant detriment to theenvironment,andformulatemeasures toprevent detriment. 3.10 Where it is deemed appropriate to provide water supply, drainage, sewerage and other essential services within the Policy Area, the Authority, and the relevant departments and agencies, shall plan them to be consistent with any demands andrestraints onsuchworks requiredorimpliedbythis Policy. 3.11 The Authority and appropriate departments and agencies shall ensure that any urban development permitted within the terms of this Statement of Planning Policy has effective provisions for the treatment and disposal of wastes and effluents. 3.12 Development of an urban character shall be prohibited or stringently controlled, in areas which the Authorityconsiders to be flood-prone, unstable, fire prone, or significant fornatureconservation,recreation,waterresourceorscenicquality. 3.13 In consultation with the Country Fire Authority, techniques for fire prevention shall bepromotedthroughout thePolicyArea. 3.14 Fireprotectiontechniques shall include:  eliminationoffirehazards withdueregardfortheenvironment;  isolationoffire-pronebushlandfrom residential areas;  provision of access for fire-fighting, fire-prevention and safety of residents;  maintenance of existing, and establishment of additional fire buffer zones as needemerges from studies ofthePolicyArea,and  continuance and expansion of fire-prevention education for residents and users ofthearea. 101. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY 3.15 The Authority shall develop strategies to contain the establishment of secondary and tertiaryindustries to types compatible with the employment needs of present local populations, andwiththeenvironment inwhichtheywouldbelocated. 3.16 The Authority, with appropriate departments, shall develop an integrated transport strategy, classifying and providing for the improvement of the road system with due regard for the environment. This strategy shall have regard for the public transport requirements of the workforce in the Policy Area, and shall takeaccount ofenergyconservationpolicies. 3.17 The Authority shall launch an educational programme to promote public understanding of this Statement of Planning Policy, and to encourage public participationintheplaningofthePolicyArea. 4.0 The Need Statement of Planning Policy No. 3 for the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges recognises the special quality of the Policy Area, and the need for appropriate, coordinated planning to conserve, and to protect and promote the well-being of the communities of the area and maintain amenity for people who useit forrecreation. 4.1 This Statement of Planning Policy recognises the wide range of factors that demand sensible and sensitive planning controls in the Policy Area. These factors include:- 4.2 Landscape and landforms of outstanding local, regional and State significance, and the importance of the Yarra River as an attribute to the character of the MelbourneregionandtheMetropolis. 4.3 The abounding natural resources so close to Melbourne, and the readily accessible recreational areas. The Policy Area is rich in native plant and animal life and has high value aesthetically, ecologically, recreationally, educationally, scientificallyandfortheconservationofsoil andwaterresources. 4.4 Substantial areas of public land important for recreation and resources management,andareas ofcatchment andwaterstorage. 4.5 The importance of the Yarra River system as a water source, and for water-based recreation and natural systems conservation, and the need to maintain water qualityaccordingly. 4.6 The susceptibility of the Yarra River and its tributaries to local and regional flooding, their importance for drainage, and the need to integrate land use planningwithfloodplainmanagement. 4.7 Other complementary Government policies, especially those related to environment protectionandtheuseofpublicland. 4.8 Areas that have been inappropriately subdivided in the Policy Area, and that haveapotential fordetriment ifdevelopedinpresent form. 102. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEONE-STATEPLANNINGPOLICY 4.9 Forested areas of significance for hardwood timber production, recreation, landscape quality, conservation and water catchment, and which require careful management tomaintaintheirvalueforthosepurposes. 4.10 The pressures for recreation and urban an residential development, and the implications oftheseforthequalityandmanagement ofthePolicyArea. 4.11 Vulnerability to bushfire damage and recognition of fire risk levels in different sections ofthe PolicyArea. 4.12 ThesuitabilityandsignificanceoflandforfarminginthePolicyArea. 4.13 The need for proper consultation between authorities responsible for planning, provision of services, resources management and development, and with communitygroups andindividuals affected. 4.14 This Statement of Planning Policy No. 3 gives priority to people, takes account of their concerns in the Policy Area and seeks to reconcile those concerns throughimplementationofthepolicyaims. 103. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE SCHEDULE TWO SITES OF CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE PART A. SITES OR FEATURES OF HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE, AND OTHER SITES OR FEATURES OF SIGNIFICANCE. A full explanation and identification of the Sites and Features listed in Part A of this Schedule maybe found in the Report bytheUpperYarraValleyandDandenongRanges Authority (1988) Conservation of Sites and Structures of Historical and Archaeological Significance. The Authority may from time to time, and on the basis of further research, identify additional sites andfeatures andaddthosetothis Schedule. The Authority will, from time to time, advise the general public, Councils, Government Departments andPublicAuthorities ofmodifications tothis listing. 1. EXISTINGSITES ORFEATURES OFHISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Former ShireofHealesville Brick house Cnr.Bell Street &ArmstrongGroveYarra Glen Coranderrk Aboriginal Cemetery PicaninnyLane,Healesville CourtHouse Cnr.Heallesville-KinglakeRoad&Hawker Street,Healesville ‘CranbrookeLodge’(New Lifefor Westmount Road,Healesville All ConferenceCentre) ‘TheElms’slab cottage Tarrawarra(‘NotreDame’)Abbey, Tarrawarra(YarraGlen-HealesvilleRoad) FormerMechanics InstituteHall 4ChurchStreet,Healesville FormerCoranderrk Aboriginal PicaninnyLane,Helaesville Station Superintendent’s house Grand Hotel (YarraGlen) MelbaHighway,YarraGlen Grand Hotel (Healesville) Cnr.MaroondahHighway&GreenStreet Healesville ‘Gulf Station’ MelbaHighway,YarraGlen HealesvilleRailwayStation (former) Healesville-KinglakeRoad,Healesville grounds, buildings and structures ‘Luffra’-FormerHealesvilleBush HarkerStreet,Healesville NursingHome 104. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE ‘Mountain Views’officeand 228-230MaroondhHighwayHealesville manchestershop Slab homestead and stables YeringGorge,YarraGlenPre-emptive Right,Parish ofSutton TrestlebridgeoverYarraRiver FormerLilydale-HealesvilleRailway,to west ofYarraGlen UnitingChurch Hall (formerMission MaroondahHighway,Healesville Church) Wooden lock-ups, HealesvillePolice MaroondahHighway,Healesville Station YarraGlen Gallery Bell Street YarraGlen Former ShireofLillydale ‘MtMary’ Coldstream West Road,Coldstream West Bickleigh ValeVillage CardiganRoad-PembrokeRoad-PineRoad, Mooroolbark ‘BluePeacock’Restaurantand Olinda-MonbulkRoad,Monbulk ‘NathaniaSprings’and Gardens ‘Brook Hill’(formerly‘Olinda McIntyreLane,Yering Yarra’) Cashin Bros. flourmill ruins LilydaleLakePark,at rearofLilydale& District Bush Hospital ‘Chateau Yering’ MelbaHighway,Yering ‘CoombeCottage’ Cnr.MelbaHighwayandMaroondah Highway,Coldstream ‘FollyFarm’ Falls Road,Olinda ‘StHuberts’Winery-formerstables St Huberts Road,Yering and remains of formerwinecellars LilydaleBaptistChurch CastellaStreet,Lilydale LilydaleCourtHouse CastellaStreet,Lilydale LilydaleHotel (the‘WhiteDog’ MainStreet,Lilydale Hotel) LilydaleMethodistChurch and Hall CastellaStreet,Lilydale(nowconvertedtoa restaurant) Mechanics Institute,Athenaeumand CastellaStreet,Lilydale FreeLibrary Old Cavehill butterand cheese DavidMitchell Estate,CaveHill,Lilydale factories Old LillydaleShireOffices CastellaStreet,Lilydale Queen VictoriaJubileeAvenue MainStreet,Lilydale 105. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE StAndrews Presbyterian Church 64-66Anderson Street,Lilydale StJohns Anglican Church Jones Street,Lilydale StPatricks Roman CatholicChurch ClarkStreet,Lilydale &Presbytery Stonehouse 32CaveHill Road,Lilydale ‘Tara’ 14GardinierStreet,Lilydale ‘TheBriars’ MaroondahHighway,Lilydale ‘TheTowers’ 6-10TheEyrie,Lilydale ‘Yeringberg’wineryand stables MaroondahHighway,Yering Timbercottage 68Anderson Street,Lilydale Former ShireofSherbrooke Disused gold mineadit Mineshaft Reserve,Macclesfield ‘BurnhamBeeches’ SherbrookeRoad,Sherbrooke DrJorgensen’s formerhouseand MainStreet,Belgrave studio ‘ForestPark’ RileyRoad,Upwey ‘Glenlucia’ BirdwoodAve.Upwey HoratioJone’s house Myrtel Grove,Tecoma ‘LongAcres’ RangeRoad,Olinda ‘LornaDoone’ Mt DandenongTourist Road,Sassafras ‘Mawarra’(gardens) SherbrookeRoad,Sherbrooke PuffingBillyRailwaytrestlebridge Belgrave-GembrookRoad,Selby PuffingBillyRailway,reserveand From BelgravetoedgeofRegionat environs Menzies Creek ‘Rostrevor’ Mt DandenongTourist Road,Sassafras ‘Talisman’ 1Royal Ave.Kallista StCuthberts Church (former) Cnr.Belgrave-GembrookRoadandChurch Street,Menzies Creek Former ShireofUpper Yarra ‘TheBigCulvert’ Woods Point-MarysvilleRoad (Cumberland) Gainsborough Store WarburtonHighway,Warburton ‘Harcourts’ WarburtonHighway,Warburton TheHomeHotel WarburtonHighway,LaunchingPlace Original settlers farmcomplex (CA78AParish ofBeenak)Prices Road, Hazeldine 106. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE Powelltown mill settlementcottages Powelltown Reefton Hotel Warburton-Woods Point Road,McMahons Creek SanitariumHealth Food Company- WarburtonHighway,Warburton factoryand Signs Publishingcomplex TheTunnel,BigPenninsula PenninsulaRoad,McMahons Creek UpperYarraHistorical Museum YarrajunctionReserve 2. OTHERSITES ORFEATURES OFSIGNIFICANCE Acheron Cauldron CaveHill DavidMitchell Estate,Lilydale ContactZone,Lysterfield Sherbrooke Granodiorite National Rhododedron Gardens Falls Road-TheGeorgianRoad,Olinda ‘Pallants Hill’(Gardens) SherbrookeRoad,Sherbrooke ‘Pirianda’(Gardens) Hacketts Road,Olinda Road cuttings WarburtonHighway,betweenSevilleand theWoori YallockCreek Warburton contactaureole ShireofUpperYarra(former) Western Escarpmentof the FormerShires ofLillydale/Sherbrooke DandenongRanges WilliamRicketts Sanctuary Mt DandenongTourist Road,Mt Dandenong Yarrafaultscarp YarraGorge 3. DESTROYEDSITES ORFEATURES OFHISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Bacon curingfactories DavidMitchell Estate,Lilydale BrushyCreek villagesite MaroondahHighway,CroydonNorth Macclesfield bakehouse Macclesfield-YellingboRoad,Macclesfield Old Fernshaw township MaroondahHighway,Fernshaw Old New Chumtownship OffMyers CreekRoad,HealesvilleNorth Old Reefton settlement Bottom ofReeftonSpurRoad Old Warburton township OldWarburtonRoad,Warburton Original Hoddles Creek township GembrookRoad,Hoddles Creek ‘Shiloah’and slab barn LinkRoadKalorama 107. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE YarraGlen PrimarySchool YarraGlen-Eltham Road,YarraGlen 108. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE B. SITES OR FEATURES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE A full explanation and identification of Sites or Features listed in this Schedule can be found in a report titled An Archaeological Survey of the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges, 1988, (A Report to the Victoria Archaeological Survey) by Hilary duCros. Further information regarding the location, management or any other attributes of the Sites orFeatures canbeobtainedfrom theVictoriaArchaeological Survey. It should be noted that the list of Sites and Features contained in this Schedule is based on limited knowledge, and that the Authority will from time to time, modifythe listing, as theinformationonadditional Sites orFeatures becomes available. B. Sites orFeatures of Archaeological Significance SiteNo.* SiteName SiteType Preservation 7922-0001 YarraGlen Surfacescatter Poor 7922-0037 Mount Mary Scarredtree Poor 7922-0038 Mooroolbark Surfacescatter Totallydestroyed 7922-0065 YarraGlenA Mound Fair 7922-0066 YarraGlenB Mound Fair 7922-0067 BrownSnakeSwampA Mound Fair 7922-0087 Toolangi 1 Surfacescatter Verypoor 7922-0088 YeringbergRidge Quarry Fair 7922-0089 EastwoodAv/TheBriars Surfacescatter Fair 7922-0090 CardiganRoad Rockarrangement Verypoor 7922-0091 WandinCreekRoad Surfacescatter Verypoor 7922-0092 OldBakerCreekRd Surfacescatter Poor 7922-0093 OldChum CreekRd Scarredtree Good 7922-0098 Worowa1 Scarredtree Poor 7922-0099 Worowa2 Scarredtree Good 7922-0100 WandinYallock1 Scarredtree Poor 7922-0101 NewChum Creek1 Scarredtree Fair 7922-0102 NewChum Creek2 Scarredtree Verypoor 7922-0103 TarrawarraAbbey Scarredtree Poor 7922-0104 WandinYallockCreek2 Surfacescatter Verypoor 7922-0105 YarraGlenReserve Surfacescatter Poor 7922-0106 Toolangi/YeaRiver Surfacescatter Poor 7922-0107 NewChum Creek3 Surfacescatter Fair 8022-0005 Lowes Road Surfacescatter Poor 8022-0006 HealesvilleW/LSanctuary1 Scarredtree Fair 8022-0007 HealesvilleW/LSanctuary3 Scarredtree Fair 8022-0008 HealesvilleW/LSanctuary5 Scarredtree Poor 8022-0010 HealesvilleW/LSanctuary2 Scarredtree Fair 8022-0011 HealesvilleW/LSanctuary4 Scarredtree Poor 8022-0012 Haggards Farm 1 Scarredtree Fair 8022-0013 Haggards Farm 2 Scarredtree Verypoor 8022-0014 Haggards Farm 3 Scarredtree Fair 109. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETWO-SITESOFCULTURALSIGNIFICANCE 8022-0015 Cement Creek1 Scarredtree Poor 8022-0016 Kwina/Badgers Creek Scarredtree Fair 8022-0019 OldWarburton1 Surfacescatter Fair 8022-0020 ParadisePlains 1 Surfacescatter Fair 8122-0001 Toorongo1 Surfacescatter Good 8122-0002 Toorongo2 Surfacescatter Good 8122-0003 Toorongo3 Surfacescatter Fair 8122-0004 Toorongo4 Exposureinbank Good 8122-0005 Montys Hut Grindinggrooves VeryPoor Lilydale,EastwoodDrive CampSite Destroyed Lilydale,CarronvaleRoad CampSite Destroyed * VictorianArchaeological SurveyRegisterNumber 110. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. SCHEDULE THREE SITES OF NATURAL SIGNIFICANCE 1. SITES OF BOTANICAL SIGNIFICANCE Reference numbers are those used in "A Review of the Sites of Botanical Significance in the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Region" by McMahon, Frood, BedggoodandCarr(1989). Site No. Location Description ofSite 1. O’ShannassyCatchment Maturewet slerophyll forest overawidearea 2. CementCreek Catchment Outstandingvegetationinexcellent condition, rareorrestrictedspecies oftenpresent. 4. Maroondah Catchment Outstandingareas ofvegetationinexcellent condition,wet sclerophyll andferngullies. 5. Watts RiverReferenceArea Vegetationingoodconditionthoughoften immature. Over-maturestandofMyrtleBeech. 6. MyrtleGullyScenicReserve Outstanding areas of vegetation dense stands 7. MyrtleCreek (Don River) ofLemonBottlebrush. PublicPurposeReserve 8. Acheron Wayand theBen Vegetationcomplements scenicroads. Cairn Road 9. Coranderrk Aqueduct Remnant vegetationoncewidespreadwithin thearea. 10. O’ShannassyAqueduct Bufferzonebetweendevelopedlandand natural forest. 11. UpperYarraCatchment Considerablefloristicandhabitat diversity 12. UpperYarraCatchment- Banksias, Hakeas andBaeckeacombiningto ClearCreek form avariedflorasector. 13. Cumberland Creek Reserve Over-matureMountainAsh andlittle disturbedferngullies. 14. Starvation Creek Unexploitedremnants ofMountainGrey Gums andBrownStringybarks. 15. McMahons Creek Vegetationfloristicallyveryrich,limited occurrencewithinRegion. 16. YarraJunction Vegetationcommunities whicharenot well representedinexistingreserves. 17. Tomahawk Creek and PossiblyonlylocalityinVictoriasupporting McCraeCreek Bricklayer's Sedge. 110. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. 18. BrittaniaCreek Maturestands ofvegetation,oncewidespread, remaininginshelteredgullies. 19. Frenchman’s Spur Outstandingareas ofalpinevegetation currentlyunderthreat ofloggingand/or clearing. 20. Pauls Range Disturbedvegetationnot well represented withinexistingreserves. 21. MtSlide OnlylocalitywithintheRegioninwhich epiphyticorchids wereobserved. 22 Christmas Hills (Part, Remnants ofnativefloraunderthreat by YarraviewRd.YarraGlen) urbanisation. 23. UpperThomson River Best exampleofalpineandsub-alpine vegetationwithintheRegion. 24. SherbrookeForest Outstandingexamples ofoncewidespread nativevegetation. 25. Silvan Reservoir Diverserangeofvegetationtypes, aresult of previous disturbances suchas fire. 26 CardiniaReservoir(Part,west Widevarietyofplant types especially ofWellingtonRoad) wildflowers. 27. DoongallaForestReserve Diverserangeofvegetationtypes, as aresult ofprevious disturbances suchas fire. 28. OlindaStateForest Largereserveofrelativelyundisturbednative vegetation. 29. DandenongRanges National Nativevegetationinpoorconditiondueto Park (UpperFerntreeGully) over-utilisationofNational Park. 30. Macclesfield Creek Verycomplex andvariedfloristic compositions. 31. Macclesfield Varietyofplant types not representedwithin existingreserves intheRegion. 32. Macclesfield Swamps Areas ofwetlandvegetationcharacterisedby densethickets ofSwampPaperbark. 33. Monbulk (Sassafras Creek) Remnant vegetationwithinlargeareas of clearedland. 35. BelgraveSouth (Courtneys Remnant vegetationnot foundinsignificant Road Reserve-Site35A) quantities withintheRegion. 36. YarraRiver Pockets ofrareandrestrictedplant species endangeredbydevelopment. 37. MontroseReserve Standoffloristicallyrichvegetationnot well representedinexistingreserves withinthe Region. 111. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. 38. WarramateHills Isolated blockofnativevegetationinavery heavilydevelopedpastoral Region. 39. Wandin North (Warburton Undisturbedsmall standofnativevegetation. Highway) 40. Killara Significant remnant ofnativevegetation amidst pastoral land. 41. OlindaCreek Pipeline Relativelyundisturbedcorridorofrich vegetation. 44. Menzies Creek (Part to west of Most southerlyrecordingofMountainAsh. WellingtonRoad) 45. Lysterfield Reserve Introducedspecies whichcouldbeutilisedfor recreationso as toeasethepressureonmore sensitivesites ofnativevegetation. 46. ColdstreamWestbillabong/s Remnant wetlandvegetation.Billabong/s mostlyintact. 47. Spadonis Reserve Remnant vegetation.Highsitepotential for rehabilitation(inpublicownership). 48. Eucalyptus crenulata stand - Indigenous stand.Pockets ofrarespecies. Yering 49. Eucalyptus crenulata stands - Examples ofendemicspecies ofarestricted Coldstream,YarraGlen distribution. district 50. Everard Park Remnant floodplainandtransitional vegetation. 51. YarraRiver(Warramate Remnant riparianandgullyvegetation. Link Hills) betweenYarraRiverandWoori Yallock CreekandtheWarramateHills. 52. Coranderrk Bushland Remnant vegetationvarieties indeveloping area. 53. YarraRiverfrontage,north of Rangeofindigenous species andrelatively Woori Yallock intact riparianvegetation. 54. Yellingbo-Parslows Bridge Remnant streamsidevegetation. 55. Melaleucasquarrosa swamp - Remnant shrubland/wet heath,formerly Caufield Grammerfarm widespreadalongminordrainagelines south oftheLittleYarraRiver. 56. Melaleucasquarrosa swamp - As above(No.55).Remnant shrubland/wet YarraJunction heath,formerlywidespreadalongminor drainagelines southoftheLittleYarraRiver. 57. LittleYarraRiver,North West Supports highdiversityofspecies, threatened of Gladysdale byclearinganddevelopment. 58. LittleYarraRiver,South West Riparianwet forest,linkbetweenhill on of Gladysdale eithersideoftheRiver. 112. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. 59. GilderoyWest Isolated blockofremnant vegetation adjoiningstream reserve. 60. GilderoyRoadside Uniquetransitionbetween M.squarrosa scrubandriparianvegetation. 61. Wesburn Recreation Reserve Remnant fringeofindigenous vegetation 62. BigPats Creek LinkbetweenYarraRiverandsoutherly ranges. 63. UpperYarraRiver- Stretchofintact riparianvegetation,linkedto Warburton toMcMahons extensivetracts ofindigenous forest. Creek 64. O’ShannassyCreek -Yarra Species ofrestricteddistribution. RiverConfluence 65. YarraRiverbelow Upper Riparianvegetationlinkedtoindigenous YarraDam forest. 66. Swamp Gumcommunitybelow Species ofrestricteddistribution. UpperYarra Dam 67. TarrawarraRoad (Eucalyptus RestrictedoccurrenceofEucalyptus pauciflora stand) pauciflora intheRegion. 68. Coldstream-Leonard Road Remnant vegetation. 69. Yering -Old RailwayReserve Remnant grassland-grassywoodland. 70. SpringRoad Supports remnant vegetationtypes which havebeenalmost eliminatedelsewhereby clearing. 72. BrushyCreek Isolated remnant ofwetlandvegetation surroundedbypasture. 73. Montrose-West Diverseandrestrictedcommunities within developedland. 74. LevershaReserve Patches ofhighqualityvegetationfringedby residential development. 75. Kilsyth South (Part,east of Relativelyintact remnant ofEucalyptus Liverpool Road) cephalocarpa withinpredominantlycleared ordisturbedland. 77. Lowes Road Extensiveintact stands ofadistinctive floristicvariant ofSclerophyll Woodland. 78. Eagles Domain Excellent examples ofrelativelyundisturbed Box StringybarkWoodland. 113. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. NOTES ONTHE USE OFTHIS SCHEDULE: A full explanation and identification of the Sites and Features listed in this Schedule may be found in the Report McMahon et al (1989), Study of Sites of Botanical Significance. Sites listed as numbers 1 to 45 were identified in the Report byGullan et al (1979) Sites of Botanical Significance in the Upper Yarra Region and have been relisted in the subsequent report byMcMahon et al. Sites listed as numbers 46 to 66 were identified in the Report byRosengren et al (1983) Sites of Environmental Significance and have been relisted in the subsequent report by McMahonet al. Sites listed as numbers 67 to 78 were identified in McMahon et al (1989) Study of Sites ofBotanical Significance. From time to time, and on the basis of further research, additional sites and features and maybeidentifiedandaddedthosetothis Schedule. 114. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. 2. SITES OF ZOOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE PART A This part includes sites numbered 1 to 35 inclusive, described byMansergh et al (1989), Study of Sites of Zoological Significance. This study should be consulted for full explanation and identification of the sites. "Previous No." in the table below, and correlation with the listed sites maybe found in theReport byFleminget al (1980)Sites ofZoological SignificanceintheUpperYarraRegion. Site Previous No. SiteName Significance SiteNo. 1. YellingboStateFaunal Reserve N Sb7 &Woori Yallock Creek corridor 2. YarraRiver&LittleYarracorridor S Ld3/UY6 3. KinglakeNational Park Paul Range S Hv2 (Part,east ofSkylineRoad) 4. Steels Creek Mine S (inHvl) 5. HealesvilleSanctuary; S Hv3 Coranderrk &surrounds RA 6. Black Sands Creek &YarraState S UY8(pt) Forest 7. Watsons Creek catchmentand Yarra RA (inHv1) Ridge (Part,east ofSkylineRoad) S 8. Lysterfield LakePark,Ash Flora RA Sb1 Reserve&Birds LakeReserve 9. DandenongRanges National Park RA Sb2 10. New ChumCreek,BlueMountain & RA Sb2 Meyers Creek 11. OlindaStateForest,Silvan Reservoir RA Sb2 &OlindaCreek Reserve 12. Butterfield WildlifeReserve RA Sb2,Sb5 &Sassafras Creek 13. Mt.Riddell toMt.Monda RA Hv5(pt) 14. Mt.Beenak,Mt.Thule&MilnerHill RA UY7 17. BrushyCreek RB NEW 18. LilydalePurification Plant RB NEW 19. Farmdam,north of Coldstream RB NEW 20. Leonard Road bushland,Lilydale RB NEW 21. PicnicHill Bushland Reserve RB Ld5 22. Menzies Creek (Part,west of RB Sb6 WellingtonRoad) 115. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. 24. Everard Park RB Ld4 25. WarramateHills RB Ld2 26. Macclesfield bushland RB Sb3 27. HenryStreetbushland,Woori Yallock RB NEW 28. Mt.Toole-Be-Wongand Don River RB HV6 29. YarraJunction RB UY7(pt) 30. Caulfield Grammarfarmwetland RB UY6(pt) 31. TheBarrierCreek Headwater RB UY6(pt) 32. YthamCreek &DirtyGully, RB NEW Warburton 33. GilderoyBushland RB NEW (adj UY6) 34. Bungalook Creek L NEW 35. Kerrs Park L NEW PART B This part includes sites numbered UY1, UY2, UY3, UY4, UY5, UY8, Hv5 and Hv7, described by Fleming et al (1980), Sites of Zoological Significance in the Upper Yarra Region. This studyshouldbeconsultedforfull explanationandidentificationofsites. UY2 UpperThomson Special Wet sclerophyll forest areas ofgreat Management wildlifevalueandaestheticappeal. Alluvial flats onriverbends support diverseplant andanimal communities. UY3 UpperYarraCatchment Topographical andvegetation variationleadtohabitat andhence animal diversity. UY4 Reefton SpurDryForest Drysclerophyll forest,areais richin reptiles. UY5 O’ShannassyCatchment Undisturbedwet sclerophyll forest exceptionallyhighvaluefor wildlife. UY8 Intensivehardwood production Diversehabitat supportingdiverse areas -UpperYarraValley faunagroups. Hv5 Maroondah ReservoirCatchment Contains relativelyundisturbed forestedareas. Matureandover- matureforest formingimportant habitats. Hv7 CambravileForestReserve Areas ofvital importancefor preservationofLeadbeaters possum. LEGEND: Significance: 116. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULETHREESITESOFNATURALSIGNIF. N National S State RA Regional -A RB Regional -B L Local NOTES: From time to time, and on the basis of further research, additional sites and features and maybeidentifiedandaddedthosetothis Schedule. The Department of Planning & Development will, from time to time, advise the general public, Councils, other Government Departments and Public Authorities of modifications tothis listing. 117. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEFOUR-TRAFFICMANAGEMENT SCHEDULE FOUR LAND USE AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ROADS 1. PRIMARY ARTERIAL ROADS 1.1 Land UseManagementMeasures Measures aimed at reducing the conflict between land use activities and traffic movements consist of: (i) directing high traffic generating land use activities on Primary Arterial Roads to those parts of the road system and local environment which can accommodate increasedtraffic; (ii) encouraging complementary land users to establish on the same side of arterial roads toavoidcross pedestrianmovements; (iii) providing development requirements including appropriate building setbacks on selectedcorners ormajorintersections tofacilitatepossibleflaring; (iv) designingandsitingbuildings toattenuatetrafficnoiseeffects; (v) management measures whichinclude: (a) controlled access to grade separated facilities and abutting properties; barriers todirect and/orprotect pedestrians; (b) alternativemeans ofaccess whereapplicable; (c) restrictions on commercial uses leading to demands for increased access byserviceroads plantationstrips andcontiguous privatestreets; (d) prevention of ribbon development of shops or other traffic generating activities which will increase pedestrian traffic and parking manoeuvers alongroads; (e) provisionofbuildingsetbacks, and (f) provisionofoff-street parkingfacilities. (vi) controllingsubdivisiontominimisethecreationoffrontages andaccess points; (vii) limitingthefrequencyofaccess points toamaximum oftwentyaccess points per kilometre,and (viii) limitingtheflowofanyhouseholdsullagewaterintotheroaddrainagesystem. 1.2 TrafficManagementMeasures Measures aimed at facilitatingtraffic movements byutilisingthe existingcapacityof the roadconsist of: (i) creatingmedians tocontrol turningmovements andincreasesafetyoftheroads; (ii) improving intersection capacity with channelization, turning bans, flaring and restrictions onaccess toandparkingnearintersections; 118. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEFOUR-TRAFFICMANAGEMENT (iii) setting appropriate speed limits dependent on the terrain and physical characteristics oftheroads; (iv) establishing parking restrictions including clear-way conditions and off-street parkingfacilities; (v) providingrouteadvisorysigns andimprovingsigningandmarking; (vi) providing pedestrian refuge, grade separated facilities and barriers to direct and/orprotect pedestrians; (vii) prohibiting stock loading or unloading of vehicles on Primary Arterial Roads, and (viii) providingaccess toabuttingproperties viaserviceroads orcommondriveways. 2. SECONDARY ARTERIAL ROADS 2.1 Land UseManagementMeasures Measures aimed at a balanced resolution of conflicts between abutting land uses and trafficmovements consist of: (i) locating and/or concentrating high traffic generating land uses to sites on Secondary Arterial Roads which can accommodate increased vehicular and pedestriantraffic; (ii) encouraging complementary land uses to establish on the same side of arterial roads toavoidcross pedestrianmovement,and (iii) limitingtheflowofanyhouseholdsullagewaterontotheroaddrainagesystem. 2.2 TrafficManagementMeasures Measures aimed at reducing traffic effects on abutting land uses and maintaining adequatetrafficmovement consist of: (i) selecting appropriate speed limits depending on the physical and environmental characteristics alongtheroad; (ii) stabilising traffic by measures which encourage use of Primary Arterial Roads forlongertrips and, (ii) banning heavy traffic vehicles on roads where suitable alternative routes are availablebetweencertainhours topreserveand/orrestorelocal amenity. 3. DISTRIBUTOR AND LOCAL ROADS 3.1 Land UseManagementMeasures Measures aimedat theenhancement oflocal trafficareas consist of: (i) giving higher priority to local activities and safety consideration than to traffic movement; and (ii) restricting land uses, except schools, on Distributor Roads which generate large amounts oftraffic. 119. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEFOUR-TRAFFICMANAGEMENT 3.2 TrafficManagementMeasures Measures aimedat control oftrafficmovement consist of: (i) selectingappropriatespeedlimits; (ii) discouragingthroughtrafficinlocal areas by: (a) turningmovement bans orcontrols; (b) full orpartial street closures; (c) roundabouts, and (d) lowspeedzones. (iii) givingprioritytopedestrians, cyclists andhorse-riders inlocal areas, and (iv) directingtourist buses and other verylarge vehicles awayfrom roads wheretheir usewouldcauseundueadverseeffects onlocal amenityandenvironments. 120. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEFOUR-ENVIRONMENTALWEEDS SCHEDULE FIVE ENVIRONMENTAL WEEDS OF THE REGION AfricanLily Agapanthus praecoxssp.orientalis Alkante Pentaglottis sepervirens AmericanAspen Populus tremuloides AngledOnion* Alliumtriquetrum Apple Malus spp. Asparagus Fern Myrsiphyilumscandens BananaPassionfruit Passiflora sp. aff.mollissima (syn.Jacsoniamollissima) BelladonnaLily Amaryllis belleadonna Berry-flowerHeath Ericabaccans Bindweeds Convolvulus spp. Blackberry* Rubus fruticosus spp. agg. BlackLocust Robiniapseudacacia Bloukeur(PinnateScurf-Pea) Psoraleapinnata Blue-bell Creeper Sollya heterophylla BluePeriwinkle Vincamajor Boneseed* Chrysanthemoides monilifera Bulbil Watsonia* Watsoniameriana ButterflyBush Buddleiavariabilis (syn.veitchianus) CapeBroom* Genistamonspessulana CapeIvy Delaireaodorata CapeWattle Paraserianthis lopantha CaucasianAsh Fraxinus oxycarpa CedarWattle Acaciaelata Cestrum Cestrumelegans CherryLaurel Prunus laurocerasus CherryPlum Prunus cerasifera CommonDipogon(Dolichos) Dipogonlignosus CommonEveningPrimrose Oenothera stricta CommonForget-me-not Myosotis sylvatica CootamundraWattle Acaciabaileyana Cotoneaster Cotoneaster spp. CreepingButtercup Ranunculus repens Darwin's Berberry Berberis darwinii EarlyBlackWattle Acaciadecurrens English Broom* Cytisus scoparius English Ivy Hedera helix Euryops Euryops abrotanifolius EvergreenDogwood Cornus capitata FalseWattle Albizia lopnatha Fennel Foeniculumvulgare Firethorns Pyracanthaspp. Flax LeafBroom* Genistalinifolia 121. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SCHEDULEFOUR-ENVIRONMENTALWEEDS Fragrant Violet Violaodorata Giant HoneyMyrtle Melaleucaarmillaris Golden WreathWattle Acaciasaligna Great Mullein Verbascumthapsus Hawthorn* Crataegus monogyna Hemlock Coniummaculatum HimilayanHoneysuckle Leycesteriaformosa Holly Ilexaquifolium HoneyMyrtle Melaleucahypericifolia ItalianBuckthorn Rhamnus alaternus JapaneseHoneysuckle Lonicera japonica Karamu Coprosmarobusta Karo Pittosporumcrassifolium Laurestinus Vibernumtinus MannaAsh Fraxinus ornus Montbretia Crocosmiaxcrocosmiifolia MorningGlory Ipomoeaindica MyrtleLeafMilkwort Polygaliamyrtifolia Pampas Grass Cortaderiaselloana PeruvianLily Alstromeriaaurea Plum Prunus spp. Portugal Laurel Prunus lusitanica PricklyPear Opuntiaaurantiaca Privet Ligustrumvulgare QuakingGrass Briza maxima RosyWatsonia Watsoniaborbonica SallowWattle Acacialongifolia ShastaDaisy Chrysanthemmaximum Smilax Myrsiphyilumasparagoides Spanish Heath Ericalusitanica StickyHopBush Dodoneaviscosa StrawberryTree Arbutus unedo Sweet Briar Rosa rubiginosa Sweet Pea Lathyrus latifolius Sweet Pittosporum Pittosporumundulatum SycamoreMaple Acer pseudo-platanus Tall Fleabane Conyza bonariensis Taupata Coprosmarepens TreeLucerne Cytisus palmensis TreeTobacco Solanummauritianum Tutsan* Hypericumandrosaemum WanderingJew Tradescantiafluminensis WhiteArum Lily Zantedeschiaaethiopica WhiteSallowWattle Acaciafloribunda Willow Salixspp. WillowHakea Hakeasalicifolia WoodViolet Violariviniana * Denotes a'Noxious Weed' undertheVermin &Noxious Weed Act1958. 122. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. SCHEDULE SIX EXEMPTIONS TO THE REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN The following exemptions have been granted to policies of the Regional Strategy Plan: Policy & Location and Exemption Granted Amnt No. Lots 8 and 10 LP 15598 Bamfield Road, McKillop may, subject to the 5.08 grant of a permit by the responsible authority, be used and developed for the purpose of a dwelling. Lot 6 LP 18105 McKillop Road, Mt. Evelyn may, subject to the grant of 5.08 a permit by the responsible authority, be used and developed for the purpose of a dwelling. Lot 10, LP 16567, Breens Terrace, Upwey may subject to the grant of a 4.09 permit by the responsible authority be used and developed for the purpose of erecting a dwelling. Lot 2, LP 51616, Avon Road, Avonsleigh may subject to the grant of a 4.09 permit by the responsible authority be used and developed for the purpose of erecting a dwelling. Lot 1, LP 207845F Swiss Chalet Road, Healesville may, subject to the 4.09 grant of a permit, be subdivided into 5 lots and each lot may be used for one house subject to:  satisfactory arrangements being made for the disposal of effluent; and  an agreement being reached with Council for a contribution to the preparation of a Local Structure Plan. Crown Allotment 130, CT 8353/201, Airlie Road, Healesville may, 4.09 subject to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into 2 lots and each lot may be used for one house. Lot 2, LP 77964, 10-14 Carter Street, Launching Place may, subject to 4.09 the grant of a permit, be subdivided into lots of not less than 0.5 hectare, and each lot used for one house (including the existing houses) subject to satisfactory arrangements being made for the disposal of effluent. The Yarra Glen Racecourse, Yarra Glen, may, subject to the grant of a 10.02 permit, be allowed to construct the ground floor of the grandstand on "land liable to flooding" (up to 1.3 metres below the specified 1% flood level), generally as described in the proposal by Collie Planning and Development Services Pty. Ltd. dated 18th January, 1990, provided that the dining area and bar facilities on the ground floor are only used on the days of scheduled race meetings. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Subject to the grant of a permit and to the approval of the relevant 10.02 drainage authority, land on the north side of the Warburton Highway, Am 53 Yarra Junction (between the Highway and the bowling club) may be used and developed for an indoor recreation centre. CA 54 & 100, Parish of Wandin Yallock, Douthie Road, Seville may, 5.17 subject to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into 6 lots under the Am 54 density matrix provisions, generally in accordance with the plan prepared by John Chivers & Ass. in Sept. 1993, and provided native vegetation along the Douthie Road frontage is retained (except for access and services to each lot). CA 16 Sec. A, Emerald-Monbulk Road, Emerald, may subject to the 5.17 grant of a permit, be subdivided into 2 lots generally of the same size. Am 56 CA 52, 57 & 58, (29ha) fronting Belgrave-Gembrook Road, 5.17 Avonsleigh, may subject to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into 2 Am 56 lots generally of the same size. Lot 2 LP 136120, Ryans Road, Lysterfield, may subject to the grant of a 5.17 permit, be subdivided into 7 lots. Am 56 CA 106E Magpie Road/Wellington Road, Clematis, may, subject to 5.10 the grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 3 lots, provided 5.17 not more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 CA 8K, Belgrave-Hallam Road/Engelke Road, Belgrave South, may 5.10 subject to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 2 lots, 5.17 provided not more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 Lots 16-19 LP 111990 & Lot 25 LP 90196, Ferres Road Emerald, may 5.10 subject to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 8 lots, 5.17 provided not more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 CA 43G No. 182 Belgrave-Hallam Road, Belgrave South, may subject 5.10 to the grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 2 lots, 5.17 provided not more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 Pt. CA Section A, No. 20 Pinnocks Road, Emerald, may subject to the 5.10 grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 3 lots, provided not 5.17 more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 Pt. CA 20A Belgrave-Gembrook Road, Menzies Creek, may subject to 5.10 the grant of a permit, be subdivided into a maximum of 3 lots, provided 5.17 not more than one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 Lots 3 & 4 LP 7667 Temple Road, Selby, may subject to the grant of a 5.10 permit, be restructured into a maximum of 2 lots, provided not more than 5.17 one house is erected or retained on each lot. Am 56 REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Lot 1 LP 116420 Glenview Road Monbulk, may subject to the grant of 5.17 a permit, be subdivided into 3 lots: one lot having an area of approx. Am 59 1.4ha, one lot of approx. 3ha, and one lot of approx. 2.7ha. The third lot must be transferred to the responsible authority without charge as a conservation reserve. Land on the north-west corner of Ryans Road and Wellington Road 5.17 Lysterfield, comprising CA 71B and Pt. CA 71A may, subject to the grant Am 61 of a permit, be subdivided into 7 lots, and each lot may be used for one house, subject to:  satisfactory arrangements being made for part of the land to be donated to the Victorian Conservation Trust;  the owner entering into conservation covenants with the Victorian Conservation Trust for each of the proposed lots. Lot 2, CP 170273P, Cnr. Queens Road & Lewis Road Silvan, may be 5.17 subdivided into 2 lots with the additional lot having an area of not more Am 62 than 2,000sqm and being for the existing additional house. No. 7 Link Road Kalorama may be subdivided into 2 lots with the 5.17 additional lot being for one additional house. Am 67 Lot 4A LP 6246 Jurat Road Lilydale may be subdivided into 2 lots and 5.17 the additional house used for one house subject to the owners of both lots Am 70 entering into an agreement under Section 173 of the Planning & Environment Act to prepare implement and maintain a revegetation program for the site. Despite the provisions of the Landscape Living Policy Area, land 4.09 described as Lots 1,2 and 3, Part Lot 45, LP 7342, and Lots 1 and 2, Am 63 LP 80225, Mt Riddell Rd, Healesville may be subdivided and developed generally in accordance with Design Concepts Plans prepared by Planning Australia Consultants in January 1993, subject to the following requirements, to the satisfaction of the responsible authority:  the issue of a planning permit;  satisfactory arrangements being made for the disposal of effluent;  the establishment and maintenance of tree reserves and open space linkages.. Lot 1, LP 74643 and part Crown Allotments 15 and 20, fronting 16.16 Delaneys Road, South Warrandyte may be used for the purpose of a Am 64 restaurant subject to the grant of a permit. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Land on the northern side of Kelletts Road, Lysterfield described in 4.09 certificates of title: Vol 9778 Folio 233, Vol 4436 Folio 095, Vol 9778 Am 60 Folio 234, Vol 7282 Folio 316, Vol 8695 Folio 929 and Vol 9480 Folio 797, may be subdivided and the lots developed with houses generally in accordance with Overall Plan of Development at Lysterfield, prepared by Breeze Pitta Dioxan Pty Ltd and dated 31 January 1995 subject to the grant of a permit. Nos. 159-161 Bailey Road, Mount Evelyn may be subdivided into 2 lots 4.09 subject to the grant of a permit. Am 72 No. 7 Link Road, Kalorama may be subdivided into 2 lots with the 5.17 additional lot being for one additional house. Am 71 Crown Allotment 16 Section A fronting Emerald-Monbulk Road, 5.17 Emerald may be subdivided into 2 lots each generally of the same size Am 71 subject to the grant of a permit. Part Crown Allotments 52, 57 and 58 fronting Belgrave-Gembrook 5.17 Road, Avonsleigh, may be subdivided into 2 lots each generally of the Am 71 same size subject to the grant of a permit. CA 7C and 7D Parish of Evelyn 1-3 Hughes Road Chirnside Park and 5.17 land in Henley Road and Skyline Road Christmas Hills described in Am 74 CT’s 9415/630, 8560/103, 8056/743 and 8056/742, may be subdivided in accordance with plans approved by the responsible authority under the site specific provisions for the land contained within the Healesville and Lillydale Planning Schemes. CA 7C and 7D Parish of Evelyn 1-3 Hughes Road Chirnside Park and 16.08 land in Henley Road and Skyline Road Christmas Hills described in Am 74 CT’s 9415/630, 8560/103, 8056/743 and 8056/742, may be used and developed for a major tourist facility in accordance with plans approved by the responsible authority under the site specific provisions for the land contained within the Healesville and Lillydale Planning Schemes. No. 2 Warburton Highway, situated on the corner of Warburton 13.11 Highway and Mangans Road, Lilydale may be used for a retail plant Am 75 nursery subject to the issue of a permit under the Lillydale Planning Scheme. Part Lot 27, LP 16122 Dee Road, Millgrove, being the land contained in 4.09 Certificate of Title Volume 7021, Folio 14040 may be subdivided into Am 75 lots of not less than 1000 sq m subject to the grant of a planning permit. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Lot 4 Liverpool Road, situated along the northern boundary of the 13.11 Landscape Living Buffer Policy Area between the northern end of Am 75 Cloverlea Drive to the south and the Township A policy area to the north may be subdivided if the following conditions are met:  the lots must have an area of between 1000 sq m and 2000 sq m;  careful attention must be given to integrating the proposed lots with the larger lots to the south, with industrial land to the north and with the residential subdivision to the north east;  the subdivision must be subject to the grant of a permit. Nos. 41-43 Killara Road, Coldstream may be consolidated into one 4.09 parcel and be re subdivided into 2 lots if the following conditions are Am 75 met:  both new lots must have access to Killara Road;  the owners of the new lots must enter into agreements under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act to prohibit further subdivision of their land,  the subdivision must be subject to the grant of a permit. No. 1 Rodger Road, Wandin North may have a second house erected 5.10 provided that it is a re-locatable house of not more than 15 squares and Am 75 that it will be removed when no longer needed for the accommodation of a parent. No. 119 Old Gippsland Road, Lilydale may be subdivided into 2 lots 4.09 subject to the grant of a permit and the owners entering into an agreement Am 75 under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act to prepare and implement a vegetation management plan for the site. Lot 3 Swansea Road, Montrose situated south west of Harrison Road, 4.09 may be subdivided into two lots subject to the grant of a planning permit Am 75 and the owners entering into an agreement under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act for the specification of a building envelope and a landscape protection and regeneration plan for each lot. Nos. 24-28 Glasgow Road, South Kilsyth may be subdivided into not 4.09 more than 4 lots subject to the grant of a permit. Am 75 Land described as Lot 2 and part Crown Allotments 13, 17 and 48, 5.10 Beenak Road, Wandin may have an additional house erected on it Am 75 provided that it will be removed when no longer needed for the accommodation of a parent. Lot 48 Edinburgh Road, Lilydale having frontages to Edinburgh Road 4.09 and Belfast Road may be subdivided into 2 lots subject to the grant of a Am 75 permit and provided that the second lot is not greater than 1000 sq m. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Nos. 3-5 Hill Road, situated on the north east corner of Hill Road and 5.17 Skye Road, Gruyere may be subdivided into two lots if the following Am 75 conditions are met:  the subdivision must be subject to the grant of a permit;  the owner of the western lot must enter into an agreement under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act requiring the specification of a building envelope for a house on the lot and the screening of the house from views from all roads to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. Land at C.A. 246 Coleman St, Wesburn may be subdivided into 6 lots 5.17 subject to the grant of a permit by the Council. The design of the Am 76 subdivision, including the size and location of the lots must be to the satisfaction of the responible authority, and have regard to drainage problems in the area and the location of nearby land uses. No. 197 Belgrave-Hallam Road, Belgrave South (Lot LP 28355) may 5.17 be subdivided into 2 lots subject to the size and shape of the proposed Am 78 lots and the specification of a building envelope being to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. Lot LP 84300, Pavitt Lane, Kilsyth may be subdivided into 2 lots each 5.17 not less than 6 hectares in area. Am 79 Crown Allotment 45, David Hill Road, Monbulk may be subdivided 5.17 into 2 lots subject to the grant of a permit and to an agreement under Am 58 Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act that no additional house may be built as a result of the subdivision. Lot 3B, LP 140414, Don Road, Launching Place may be subdivided 5.17 into 3 lots in accordance with the requirements of the planning scheme. Am 80 Crown Allotment 148, Airlie Road, Healesville may be subdivided into 5.17 2 lots in accordance with the requirements of the Healesville Planning Am 80 Scheme. Part Lot 2, Plan of Subdivision 115318, Ross Road, Gruyere may be 5.17 subdivided into 3 lots and each lot may be used for one house each Am 81 subject to the specification of a building envelope and the location of access driveways to minimise the loss of native vegetation to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. Lot 1 Plan of Subdivision 117000, Blythes Road, Mount Dandenong 4.09 may be subdivided into 2 lots each greater than 4000 sq m. Am 82 Lots 3-6 Fairhaven Road, Mount Dandenong may be subdivided into 2 4.09 lots each not less than 1,600 square metres. Am 82 Lot 43E, Belgrave-Hallam Road, Belgrave South described in 5.17 Certificate of Title Volume 8059 Folio 521 may be subdivided into 2 lots Am 83 and each lot used for one house subject to the grant of a permit. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Despite the Rural Areas Policy provisions, land in Lysterfield Rd, 5.17 Lysterfield, described in Certificate of Title Volume 8695, Folio 929, Am 85 may be subdivided into two lots to allow that part of the land which is included in a Rural Landscape Policy 1 Area to be excised from the balance of the land. Lot 1 LP 124378, Dalry Road, Launnching Place, may be subdivided 5.17 into 2 lots subject to the grant of a permit and to an agreement under Am 86 Section 173 of the Planning & Environment Act to protect remnant vegetation. Lot 1 LP 12950 Martyr Road, Warburton, may be subdivided, used 5.17 and developed for a major tourist facility and restaurant in accordance Am 87 with a detailed development plan approved by the responsible authority. No 99 Mt Morton Rd, Belgrave Sth, on the corner of Chaundry Rd, 5.17 may be subdivided into 3 lots and each lot used for a single house subject Am 89 to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority. Crown Allotment 38A, Parish of Narre Worran, (vol.8365 fol. 5.17 767).Old Menzies Creek Rd, Selby, may be subdivided into not more Am 89 than 4 lots and each lot used for a single house subject to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority Crown Portion 155803 (vol 9522. fol 487) Perrins Creek Rd, Olinda, 5.17 may be subdivided into 2 lots and each lot used for a single house subject Am 89 to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority Lot 2 (vol.4945 fol.808833) Melba Hwy, Yarra Glen,may be 5.17 subdivided into 2 lots and each lot used for a single house subject to the Am 89 grant of a permit by the responsible authority No 413 (vol.9026 fol.695, vol. 8129 fol.863) Warburton Hwy, Wandin 5.17 North, may be subdivided into 2 lots generally in accordance with the Am 89 plan prepared by Millar and Merigan (drawing no. 9844, dated 3/5/94) subject to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority Park Lot 26, LP 3862, par CA 21, Parish of Warburton, Big Pats 5.17 Creek Rd, Warburton East, may be subdivided into 4 lots comprising 3 Am 89 lots fronting Big Pats Creek Rd, and a fourth balancel lot, each of which may be used for a single house,subject to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. 199 Mt Morton Rd, Belgrave South (vol. 9637 fol. 559) may be 4.09 subdivided into 3 lots generally in accordance with the plan prepared by 5.17 Nicholas Petris and Associates and dated March’96 and each lot used for Am 89 single house subject to the grant of permit by the responsible authority Lot 3, PS 347520M, Wellington Rd, Wandin North, may be 5.16 subdivided into 3 lots generally in accordance with the plan (ref. 9442T3, Am 89 6 March, 1996) prepared by Millar and Merrigan, and proposed Lots 1 and 3 used for a single house, subject to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority CA 126 Badger Creek Rd, Healesville 4.09 5.17 Land generally bounded by the southern boundaries of part CA 128 Am 89 and lots 44, 45, 49, 54 and 55 and Reserve on PS 302637, Don Rd, and the northern boundary of CA 126 and Badger Creek Rd; Lot 4 and Lots 10 to 19, LP 6192 and Lots 1, 8-14 and 17, LP 51693 and CP 101585 Toora Cres; CA 105 Badger Creek Rd; CA 102 Badger Creek Rd; may be subdidvided and used for one house only if: * the proposed use and development is allowed under an approved amendment under the relevant planning scheme; * the approved planning scheme amendment has been exhibited and any submissions have been considered under Part 3 of the Planning and Environment Act Land at 59 (Lot 75 LP 9989) Coutneys Rd, Belgrave South, may be 5.17 subdivided and used for one house only if: Am 89 * the proposed use and development is allowed under an approved amendment under the relevant planning scheme; * the approved planning scheme amendment has been exhibited and any submissions have been considered under Part 3 of the Planning and Environment Act CA 46A, CA’s F F1 and 20, Parish of Nangana, Merrets Rd, 5.17 Kennedy Rd and land bounded by Cherry Rd, Spillers Rd, Am 89 Tschampions Rd, Smethurst Rd, Macclesfield, may only be subdivided and used only if: * the proposed use and development is allowed under an approved amendment under the relevant planning scheme; * the approved planning scheme amendment has been exhibited and any submissions have been considered under Part 3 of the Planning and Environment Act REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Land at Lot 2, LP 76111 and Lot 5 LP 11718, Blacksprings Rd and Am 89 Bushy Park Rd, Chirnside Park, and included in Township A policy may only be subdivided and used only if: * the proposed use and development is allowed under an approved amendment under the relevant planning scheme; * the approved planning scheme amendment has been exhibited and submissions have been considered under Part 3 of the Planning and Environment Act Lot 4 LP 94149, Whelans Rd, Healesville may be subdivided into two 5.17 lots generally along the alignment of the government road if the Am 91 following conditions are met: * the primary and secondary lots my be used for a single house subject to the specification of a building envelope to the satisfaction of the responsible authority Part CA’s 13, 14 and 23, and CA 22 McGrettons Rd, and Henry St, 4.09 Healesville may be subdivided and used in accordance with the Am 92 provisions of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme applying to this land. (refer Amendment L 9 Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme). Part Lot 9, No 7 Como Rd, Lilydale may be subdivided into 2 lots to be 4.09 used for one dwelling each, subject to the location of a building envelope Am 93 and access driveway to the satisfaction of the responsible authority and Am L 37 subject to any requirements of relevant referral authorities Lot 4,LP 144424, Brandt Rd, Lysterfield, may be subdivided into 4 4.09 lots subject to: Am 94 * one lot containing the area of land required for future road reserves Am L 36 being transferred at no cost to VicRoads; * the owner(s) entering into and Agreement under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act, 1987 to prepare a management plan for the area of botanical significance, identified in the planning scheme, and to fence the area to the satisfaction of the responsibl authority in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources and Environment; * any requirements of relevant referral authorities being complied with Lot 3 East Wandin Rd, Wandin, may be subdivided into 2 lots subject 5.17 to: Am 95 * the lot around the older house being as small as possible so as to Am L 35 minimise the loss of productive agricultural land, to the satisfaction of the responsible authority; * the owner enters into an Agreement under Section 173 of the Planning and Environment Act not to seek any further subdivision, and to ensure that the land is used for agricultural purposes whilst it remains in the same ownership * any requirements of relevant referral authorities being complied with No’s 8-12 Henderson Hill Road, Silvan, may, subject to the grant of a 5.17 permit, be subdivided into two lots, provided that a building envelope is Am 96 specified on each lot Am L 15 REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Lot 17 Greenridge Crt, Wesburn may be subdivided into 3 lots subject 4.09 to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority Am 97 Am L 48 Lot 2, LP 125185, Healesville-Yarra Glen Rd, Healesville, may be 5.17 subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Yarra Ranges Am 98 Planning Scheme (Amendment L 57) Am L 57 Lot 11, LP 9303, 19 Leggett Drive, Mt Everlyn, may, subject to the 4.09 grant of a permit by the responsible authority , be subdivided into two Am 99 lots with an existing house to be contained within each lot Am L 42 Lot 2, LP 128420, 1760 Warburton Hwy, Woori Yallock, may, subject 5.19 to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority, be subdivided into Am 100 two lots with an existing house to be contained within each allotment Am L 43 Lot 5, LP 14341, 30 Hunter Rd, Wandin, may be subdivided into 2 lots 5.17 subject to the grant of a permit by the responsible authority, and one of Am 101 the lots being between 0.8 and 1.2 ha Am L 49 CP 158132, 30-34 Glasgow Rd, Wandin, may be subdivided into 5 lots 5.17 subject to the conditions contained in the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme Am 105 Am L 74 Lot 8, and part Lot 9, LP 5699, Harrison Rd, Montrose, may be 4.9 subdivided subject to the conditions contained in the Yarra ranges Am 105 Planning Scheme Am L 74 Lots 48 and 49, LP 11500 Stubbs Ave, Mt Everlyn, may be 4.9 subdivided subject to the conditions contained in the Yarra Ranges Am 105 Planning Scheme Am L 74 Land bounded by Fortune Ave, Hereford Rd, Kookaburra La, Old 4.09 Hereford Rd and Old Gippsland Rd, Mt Everlyn, may be subdivided Am 105 subject to the conditions contained in the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme AmL 74 145-147 Old Gippsland Rd, Lilydale, may be subdivided into 2 lots 4.09 subject to the requirements contained in the Yarra Ranges Planning Am 106 Scheme Am L 77 Part CA 2 (vol 8399 fol 322) Victoria Rd, Wandin, may be subdivided 5.17 into 2 lots subject to the requirements contained in the Yarra Ranges Am 106 Planning Scheme Am L 77 Lot 11 Anne St, Lilydale, may be subdivided into 2 lots subject to the 4.09 requirements contained in the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme Am 107 Am L 78 Lots A and B, Carrol Rd, Coldstream, may be used for restaurant 5 (private function facility) subject to the requirements of the Yarra Ranges 16.17 Planning Scheme Am 108 Am L 85 REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - SCHEDULE SIX - EXEMPTIONS TO THE R.S.P. Lot 83, LP6548, 52 Bartley Rd, Belgrave South may be subdivided 4.09 into two (2) lots subject to the grant of a planning permit by the Am 114 responsible authority. All land within the municipal district of the Shire of Yarra Ranges. All policies Vegetation may be removed, destroyed or lopped in accordance with Am 119 Clause 52.48 and Clause 53.01 of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. All land within the municipal district of the Shire of Yarra Ranges. All policies Vegetation may be removed, destroyed or lopped to reduce fuel loads on Am 119 roadsides to minimise the risk to life and property from bushfire in accordance with Clause 53.01 of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. All land within the municipal district of the Shire of Yarra Ranges. All policies A building may be constructed and works may be constructed and carried Am 119 out in accordance with Clause 52.48 and Clause 53.01 of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. 115 and 121 Old Emerald Road, Monbulk may be developed and used 16.08 as a minor sport and recreation facility subject to the requirements of the Am 120 Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. 261 Mount Dandenong Tourist Road, Ferny Creek may be used and 16.07 developed as a restaurant and caretaker’s house subject to the 16.17 requirements of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. Am 121 2837 Warburton Highway, Wesburn; 2874 Warburton Highway, 13.11 Wesburn; 2876 Warburton Highway, Wesburn; 2882 Warburton Am123 Highway, Wesburn; 2907 Warburton Highway, Wesburn; 1995 Warburton Highway, Launching Place; 2000 Warburton Highway, Launching Place; and 2010 Warburton Highway, Launching Place may be used and developed for commercial purposes subject to the requirements of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme. UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN SCHEDULE 8: REGISTER OF AMENDMENT TO THE REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN. Including Amending Regional Strategy Plans prepared but not yet approved. Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Notice of approval 27 OCT 1983 82/846 26 OCT 1982 of regional strategy 105/3542 plan Variation of regional 23 MAR 1983 83/607 16 MAR 1983 A variation to confirm the strategy plan 26/658 final printed version of the Regional Strategy Plan, its maps and a number of 'editorial' amendments. Amendment no.1 25 MAY 1983 83/664 17 MAY 1983 An Amendment (s.20) to Affected - 47/1261 correct 'Table 1', which Policies; provides for Public Land Table 1 and uses. Also, a correction was P2.41 made to clarify the policy relating to sub division of land within the Puffing Billy Visual Corridor (not adjacent to it) Amendment no.2 13 JUN 1984 84/879 5 JUN 1984 This Amendment (section Affected 65/1894 20) provided for the Maps; Map redesignation of land in 1, 3 and 4 Pauls Range, which has been the subject of land swap between a private land owner and the Forest Commission of Victoria. Amendment no.3 9 MAY 1984 - 84/868 3 MAY 1984 An Amendment (section 20) Affected 54/1391 which included a further Policies; schedule, No. 8, which would P3.193/A3.1 contain all of the specific 93 amendments and to provide for the sub division of land in Wonga Park into two allotments (Ministerial 'Hardship' amendment). Amendment no.4 3 APR 1985 - 84/880 26 MAR 1985 An Amendment (section 20) Affected 27/879 to allow for the subdivision of Policy land at Seville (Ministerial P3.204/A3.1 'Hardship' amendments). 70 Amendment no.5 3 APR 1985 - 84/832 26 MAR 1985 An Amendment (section 20) Affected 27/880 to allow for the subdivision of Policies; land at Avonsleigh P3.204/A3.2 (Ministerial 'Hardship' 04 amendment). Amendment no.6 16 APR 1986 85/1114 8 APR 1986 An Amendment (section 21) Affected - 24/902 to replace and clarify the Policies; 'transfer and consolidation' A3.25(c), policies, in Non Urban Policy A3.49 (c) Areas. A3.75 (d), A3.100 (d) A3.122(c), A3.147 (d), SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 1 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected A3.173 (d), A3.195 (c) and A3.220 (c) Amendment no.7 29 MAY 1985 84/870 21 MAY 1985 An Amendment (section 20) Affected - 52/1780 to allow a house to be Policies; constructed (and 'tenement P3.200/A3.2 holding' split) in Ferny Creek. 00 and (Ministerial 'Hardship' P3.204/A3.2 amendment). 04 Amendment no. 8 26 JUN 1985 85/1104 18 JUN 1985 An amendment (section 20) Affected - 66/2410 to allow subdivision of land in policy; Olinda. (Ministerial 'Hardship' P3.218/A3.2 amendment) 18 Amendment no.9 26 JUN 1985 85/1124 18 JUN 1985 An amendment (Section 20) Affected - 66/2410 to allow a house to be policy; constructed (and 'tenement P3.22/A3.22 holding' split) in Mt.Evelyn. (Ministerial 'Hardship' amendment). Amendment no. 10 9 NOV 1988 8 NOV 1988 An amendment (section 21) Affected to redesignate Urban 3 land Maps; Map in the Lysterfield area to.... 1, 2, 3 and Non Urban Policy Areas. Map Series 15. Amendment no. 11 30 JUL 1986 83/614 22 JUL 1986 An amendment (Section 20) Affected - 65/2963 to redesignate incorrectly Maps; 1, 2, 3 shown Public land in Kilsyth and 4 South as Rural Landscape 2 Amendment no. 12 4 NOV 1987 - 85/1189 27 OCT 1987 An amendment (Section 21) Affected G43/2948 which provides for a policies and clarification and broadening maps; of the policies relating to A2.13, 'land liable to flooding', A2.30, including defining (by new A2.49. maps) 'flood fridge areas'. A3.13, A3.37, A3.61, A3.87, A3.117, A3.134, A3.160, A3.185, A3.206 and Map Series 16 Amendment no.13 24 SEP 1986 86/1161 16 SEP 1986 An amendment (section 20) Affected - 77/3609 which provided for policy; clarification that sub divisions P3.218 could occur in Commercial Centres, in Landscape Living Policy Areas. SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 2 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no.14 19 NOV 1986 84/815 11 NOV 1986 An amendment (Section 20) Affected - 97/4406 to allow for the subdivision of Policy' land (for a church) in Olinda P3.218 (Ministerial 'Hardship' amendment). Amendment no. 16 8 APR 1987 - 83/654 31 MAR 1987 An amendment (Section 20) Affected G14/789 to redesignate land in Maps; Map 3 Montrose, to allow a 'Major Tourist Development.' A Ministerial amendment. 'York on Lilydale' - York Rd, Montrose. Amendment no. 17 12 AUG 1987 86/1176 4 AUG 1987 An amendment (Section 20) Affected - G31/2130 to allow a house to be Policy; P3.11 constructed (and to split a 'tenement holding') on land in McKillop. A Ministerial Amendment. Amendment no. 18 25 MAY 1988 86/1164 24 MAY 1988 An Amendment (Section 20 - Affected (and 20 see below) Ministerial Amendment) to policy provide for the rezoning of P3.170 land in David Hill Rd, Monbulk (refer to Lillydale Amnt L6/223) Amendment no.19 20 JUL 1988 88/0034 19 JUL 1988 An amendment to Affected - G27 p.2148 remove/alter the Policies; requirements for planning P3.06, permits in Non Urban Policy P3.30, areas, for houses, Farm P3.54, Buildings and other P3.58, buildings. P3.80, P3.84, P3.105, P3.109, P3.127, P3.131, P3.153, P3.157, P3.179 and P3.200. Amendment no. 20 21 SEP 1988 86/1164 20 SEP 1988 This is a re- approval of (refer to am>18 AMENDMENT NO. 18, the above) Ministry for Planning and Environment prepared t (2) amendments for this matter. Amendment NO.18 will be revoked. Amendment no. 21 18 APR 1989 87/1026 5 APR 1989 An amendment to Affected redesignate land (Lot 2, LP Maps; Map 124363, CA 31A and CB 3. Non 31B) in Killara Road, Urban Land Gruyere from Rural 3 to Rural Landscape 2, at the request of the shire from Lillydale. SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 3 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 22 3 MAY 1989 87/1242 2 MAY 1989 An amendment to Affected redesignate the 'status' of Policies; the Upper Ferntree Gully P2.77 commercial centre as a Large Community Centre' Amendment no. 23 88/0152 This amendment is to Affected provide for the reprint of the Policies; Regional Strategy Plan. This whole of the amendment is Section 20 R.S.P (Ministerial) amendment. Amendment no. 24 18 APR 1989 87/1031 5 APR 1989 An amendment to provide for Affected the 'urban' designation of Map; Map land in Collier Road, Kilsyth. series 15 - (Handisyde property.) Urban Areas Amendment no. 25 83/611 An amendment to allow the subdivision of the 'Yarraloch' property in the Warramate Hills. Amendment no.26 5 APR 1989 86/1194 25 MAR 1989 An amendment to provide for the approval of the AM 205/ L31 to the Lillydale Planning Scheme, Lilydale’s 'implementing' scheme. Amendment no. 27 31 MAY 1989 89/0025 30 MAY 1989 An amendment to provide for a Ministerial 'hardship' so as to split a 'tenement' property in Hazel Cres. Healesville. Amendment no. 28 88/0540 An amendment to provide for a 'major tourist development' at Olinda - 'Ashendene', Falls Rd and Williams Rd. This change also includes an amendment to the 'regional section' of the planning scheme. See AM R3. Application for amendment withdrawn by proponent. Amendment no. 29. 88/0152 This amendment is to Affected Review of r.s.p provide for the REVIEW of Policies; the Regional Strategy Plan. whole of the This amendment is the R.S.P whole of the R.S.P Amendment no. 30 88/0385 This amendment is to Affected provide for the approval of Policies; Am.L23B to the Lillydale Intensive Planning Scheme, and is a Agriculture Sec'n. 20 'Ministerial' 1, amendment. P3.11/A3.11 (a) Amendment no. 31 89.0222 This amendment is to provide for the approval of an amendment to the Healesville Planning Scheme, and is a Sec'n. 20 'Ministerial' amendment to release a 'tenement' control SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 4 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected from CA's 65E and 65D Ellis Rd Toolangi Amendment no. 32 89/0095 This amendment is to Affected provide for the extension of Policies; Urban Policy areas in the Urban Policy Lillydale Planning Scheme. Area Maps. This is a Sec’n 14(3) 'Ministerial' amendment that is the Minister has directed that the Authority prepare an amendment in a certain manner. Amendment no. 33 89 This amendment is to Affected provide for the alteration of Policies; the 'DENSITY MATRIX' P3.170 / provisions, for sub division, A3.170 (B), in a Rural Landscape 2 part (iv) in Policy Area. A request to be table, made to the Minister for a change 8ha Sec’n. 20(without exhibition) to 16ha. amendment. Amendment no. 34 89.0211 This amendment is to provide for the alteration of the Rural 2 Policies to allow for the designation of land in Pinnacle Lane, Dixon Creek as 'recreation; Mountain Districts Pistol Club, and to allow for a smaller (23ha) excision to occur. Amendment no. 35 90.0054 This amendment is to Affected provide for the extension of Policies; Urban Policy areas in the Urban Policy Lilydale area, in particular to Area Maps. the S.W of Black Springs Road. Refer also Am 32. 89.0095. This is a Sec'n. 14(3) 'Ministerial' amendment that is the Minister has directed that the Authority prepare an amendment in a certain manner. Amendment no. 36 89 This amendment is to provide for the approval of an amendment to the Healesville Planning Scheme, and is a Sec'n 20 'Ministerial' amendment to release a 'tenement control from CA. 31 Wallace Pde. Healesville SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 5 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 37 89 This amendment is to provide for the approval of an amendment to the Healesville Planning Scheme, and is a Sec’n 20 'Ministerial' amendment to release a 'tenement control from 11 Christie Pde, Healesville. Amendment no. 38 Amendment no. 48 92/0031 Release of 'tenement' controls in Healesville (subsequently abandoned) Amendment no. 49 2 DEC 1992 93/0054 10 NOV 1992 This amendment (section 20) Affected provided for the removal of Maps: Map certain areas, in Warwick Series 10 Farm Road, Olinda and in Aurora Rise, Sassafras, from the Fire Buffer Zone maps approved as part of Amendment 29 to the Regional Strategy Plan. (Subsequently, in July 1993, the approval of Amendment 51 resulted in the removal of all Map Series 10 from the Regional Strategy Plan.) Amendment no. 50 * 8 APR 1993 92/0158 6 APR 1993 The Regional Strategy Plan Affected incorporated in is amended (Section 20) by Policies; regional strategy the consolidation of whole of the plan (1992) maps approved Amendments 29 R.S.P and 49, incorporating editorial and minor changes to policies and maps agreed to by the Authority on 2nd September 1992. The Strategy Plan is varied so as to accord with the document entitled 'Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Authority Regional Strategy Plan (1992)' Amendment no. 51 * 29 July 1993 93/0162 27 July 1993 The Regional Strategy Plan Affected incorporated in is amended (Section 20) by Policy: 16.04 regional strategy the replacement of Policy (replace plan (1992) maps 16.04 by a new policy pages 186- (16.04), and by the removal 188) of the Map series 10 from Affected the Strategy Plan Maps. Maps: Map This, in effect, abandons the Series 10 Fire Buffer/Conservation (All sheets) Zone concept, and recognises the fire safety of residents living in the Dandenong Ranges is primarily the responsibility of the individual to decide. The amendment also requires the SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 6 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Department of Conservation and Natural Resources to identify any lots intended for purchase, and to seek the inclusion of such lots as Proposed Public Open Space in the Lillydale and Sherbrooke Planning Schemes, and the Regional Sections of the Healesville, Lillydale, Sherbrooke and Upper Yarra Valley Planning Schemes, have been appropriately and concurrently amended (Amendment R11) Amendment no. 52 93/0070 Launching Place (now abandoned) Amendment no. 53 93/0201 Allow an Indoor Recreation ** approved, not yet Centre on flood - prone incorporated in Land, Yarra Junction strategy plan Amendment no. 54 93/0217 Site-specific subdivision ** approved, not yet exception, Douthie Rd, incorporated in Seville [8.30(h)] strategy plan Amendment no. 55 27 JAN 1994 93/0242 11 JAN 1994 This amendment changes Affected ** not yet the Policy Area designation Map: Map incorporated in of land fronting Stradbroke Series 1, regional strategy Road, Montrose, from Sheet 12 plan (1992) replacer Landscape Living (Buffer) to maps Township B. Amendment no. 56 1 DEC 1994 93/0200 22 NOV 1994 This is a 'Jumbo' amendment Affected ** not yet (Section 20) including items Policies: incorporated in related to Amendment L61 of New policies regional strategy the Sherbrooke Planning in bold type: plan (1992) replacer Scheme, supported by the 3.22/22A/25- maps Authority because of clear 6, anomalies, of development 6.05/07/08, and topographical 8.28/28A/30* characteristics of land, or /31, relating to the Puffing Billy 9.19/19A/21/ Corridor. Other items include 24, Table 2. new and altered policies for (* clause re-subdivision, clarification of number mapping anomalies, the altered in allowance of subdivision of AM 71) two separate parcels of land Affected in Emerald and Avonsleigh, Maps: Map the allowance of a seven - lot Series 1 - subdivision in Lysterfield, Sheets, 2, 5, and eight site specific 12, 13, 14, amendments approved by 20, 21, 22, the minister as part of 24, 27; Map Sherbrooke Amendment L61 Series 3 and but not exhibited 9. SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 7 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 57 93/0200 (This amendment has now been abandoned, in favour of Amendment 75) Amendment no. 58 93/0018 Site-specific subdivision exception, David Hill Rd, Monbulk [8.30 (.)] (See L106) Amendment no. 59 93/0249 Site-specific subdivision ** approved, not yet exception, Glenview Rd, incorporated in Monbulk [8.30] (j) ] (See strategy plan L106) Amendment no. 60 9 MAR 1995 94/0076 7 MAR 1995 This is an area - specific Affected ** not yet amendment (Section 21), Policy: 9.24 incorporated in exhibited concurrently with Affected regional strategy Amendment L76 to the Map: Map plan (1992) replacer Sherbrooke Planning Series 1, maps Scheme, to allow subdivision Sheet 5 of land fronting Kellets Road, Lysterfield Amendment no. 61 93/0296 Area-specific amendment ** approved, not yet (Sec 20) Wellington/Ryan’s incorporated in Rds, Lysterfield (8.31) strategy plan Amendment no. 62 93/0176 Site-specific subdivision ** approved, not yet exception, Queens Rd, incorporated in Silvan [8.30 (I)] strategy plan Amendment no. 63 94/0033 This is an area - specific Affected amendment (Section 21), to Policy: 9.24 change the policy area Affected designation and allow higher Map: Map density subdivision of land in Series 1, Wallace Pde and Mt.Riddell Sheet 24 Road, Healesville. Amendment no. 64 94/0202 Site-specific (Sec.21) amendment for restaurant, Delancys Rd. S. Warrandyte Amendment no. 65 93/0211 Site-specific (Sec.21) amendment, M.T. Facility, Warburton (11.18) Amendment no. 66 93/0215 Site-specific (Sec.21) amendment, M.T. Fac., Gumnut Vill, Montrose (11.18) Amendment no. 67 93/0178 Site-specific (Sec.20) ** approved, not yet amendment for subdn., Link incorporated in Rd, /Kalorama [8.30 (I)] strategy plan Amendment no. 68 93/1087 Site-specific (Sec.20) amendment for subdn., Whelans Rd, H'ville SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 8 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 69 9 FEB 1995 94/0155 31 JAN 1995 This is a site- specific Affected ** not yet amendment (section 20) to Map : Map incorporated in allow subdivision of Series, regional strategy properties fronting Roach Sheet 11 plan (1992) replacer Road, Lilydale maps Amendment no.70 93/0179 Site-specific (sec.20) amendment, Jurat Rd, Lilydale Amendment no.71 Correction of Am's56b and 67 Amendment no.72 C1 9.24 Amendment no. 73 Rose Charman cottage. Emerald Monbulk Rd Amendment no. 74 Correction for Heritage Golf Course Amendment no. 75 94/0200; Lilydale Am L 106 - Scheme Affected 93/0230 Review - This is a Section 20 Policies: (Ministerial) amendment, New policies incorporating Policy changes in bold type: exhibited as part as a Chap 1; ‘Jumbo’ Amendment 57 Policies (Now abandoned in favour 2.02, 4.06, of Amendment 75), together 4.16, 8.22-3, with changes to policies and 8.30, maps arising from the need 9.13/24, to reconcile the Strategy 11.19/24, Plan with the revised 11.19/21 and Sherbrooke Planning 13.09; Scheme (Amendment L61), Glossary; and the revised Lillydale Schedule 1. Planning Scheme Affected (Amendment L106). Maps: Map Series 1 - Changes relating to the Sheets 4 Sherbrooke Scheme deal with policies for small pockets of private land in Public Land policy areas – and visa-versa, changes to watercourse setback requirements in Landscape Living policy areas, relaxation of tourist accommodation (bed and breakfast size) policies in Landscape Living and Intensive Agriculture policy areas, and allowance of restaurants on Public Land and in some Township A policy areas. Those relating to the Lillydale Scheme have yet to be finished. Other items include the allowance of subdivision of SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 9 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected land fronting Dee Road, Millgrove, removal of floor space limits in the Lillydale and Chirnside Park commercial centres, removal of Upwey and Tecoma as Centres of Regional Significance, and a more specific policy for commercial use and development in Landscape Living and Rural Policy Areas. There is also clarification of policies for afforestation, and of procedures for consideration of National Trust comments when dealing with landscapes. Amendment no. 76 Tektanopoulos. Coleman Rd, Wesburn Amendment no. 77 Lilydale airfield Amendment no. 78 Ryzman. 197 Belgrave- Hallam Rd, Belgrave Sth Amendment no. 79 Corrections to Lilydale L106 Amendment no. 80 Subdivisions: Don Rd (Mathews), Airlie Rd (Bail) Healesville Amendment no. 81 Ross Rd Amendment no. 82 Corrections to Am 75: Fairhaven Rd, Blythes Rd, Bridge water Rd. Amendment no. 83 Belgrave-Hallam Rd Amendment no. 84 Little Yarra Rd, Poweltown (map amendment) Amendment no. 85 Subdivision,; Lysterfield Rd (Ruff) Amendment no. 86 Lot 1 Dalry Rd, Healesville. Amendment no. 87 Warburton Mountain Resort Amendment no. 88 Subdivision: Lot 20 Farm Lane, Launching Place Amendment no. 89 Numerous subdivision and other exemption clauses. Amendment no. 90 Re-write of RSP Amendment no. 91 Whealans Rd, Healesville Amendment no. 92 McGrettons Rd, Healesville Amendment no. 93 Como Rd, Lilydale Amendment no. 94 Wellington and Brandt Rd, Lysterfield SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 10 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 95 Lot 3 Eat Wandin Rd, Wandin Amendment no. 96 Henderson Hill rd Amendment no. 97 Lot 3 Greenridge Crt, Wesburn Amendment no. 98 Lubra Bend, Healesville Amendment no. 99 Leggett Dve, Mt Evelyn (Yarra Ranges Am L 42) Amendment no. 100 1960 Warburton Hwy Woori Yallock (Yarra Ranges Am L 43) Amendment no. 101 30 Hunter Rd, Wandin Amendment no. 102 Wellington Rd, Lysterfield (Kopelis) not proceeded with Amendment no. 103 Subdivision provisions - 2 existing houses (Yarra Ranges Am L 72) Amendment no. 104 Yarra Valley Quarries (Yarra Ranges Am L 51) Amendment no.105 Subdivisions arising from Am L 132 (Yarra Ranges Am L 74) Amendment no. 106 Numerous items: Stephens, Johnston, Harte. (Yarra Ranges Am L 77) Amendment no. 107 Anne St Lilydale. (Yarra Ranges Am L 78) Amendment no. 108 Carroll Rd, Coldstream. (Yarra Ranges Am L) Amendment no. 109 Silvan No 2 site. (Yarra Ranges Am L) Amendment no. 112 Lot 9 Old Coonara Rd, Olinda. Not proceeded with Amendment no. 113 Liverpool/Pavitt/Sheffield. (Yarra Ranges Am L 113) Amendment no. 114 52 Bartley Rd, Belgrave South. 2 lot subdivision. (Yarra Ranges C20) Amendment no. 115 73-75 Nelson Rd, Lilydale. 2 lot subdivision. (Yarra Ranges C32) Amendment no. 116 Melbourne 2030/UGB consistency. N/A Amendment no. 117 Lot 3 Holloway Rd, Wodonga Park. Township A policy area. SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 11 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected Amendment no. 118 Vegetation removal - bushfire prevention. VC61, 10 September 2009. Amendment no. 119 This amendment changes the list of exemptions in Schedule 6 to the policies set out in the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan (Regional Strategy Plan) Amendment no. 120 15 AUG 2013 23 APR 2013 Includes the land at 115 and 121 Old Emerald Road, Monbulk in Schedule 6 of the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan so the land can be developed and used as a minor sport and recreation facility. Amendment no.121 14 MAY 2015 1 AUG 2014 Includes the land at 261 Mount Dandenong Tourist Road, Ferny Creek in Schedule 6 of the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan to allow the land to be used and developed as a restaurant and caretaker’s house on the site. Amendment no. 123 Amends Schedule 6 to 13.11 and include the exemption of the 15.03 eight properties listed below from Chapter 13.11, so that they may be used and developed for commercial purposes subject to the requirements of the Yarra Ranges Planning Scheme: 2837 Warburton Highway, Wesburn 2874 Warburton Highway, Wesburn 2876 Warburton Highway, Wesburn 2882 Warburton Highway, Wesburn 2907 Warburton Highway, Wesburn 1995 Warburton Highway, Launching Place 2000 Warburton Highway, Launching Place 2010 Warburton Highway, Launching Place Amends Chapter 15.03 to reinstate the Clause that was SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 12 OF 13 OFFICIAL UPPER YARRA VALLEY AND DANDENONG RANGES REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN Amendment No. Gazettal Authority Approval Details Policies Date Reference Date Affected introduced into the plan in Amendment 104 in 1997. Amendment no. 122 30 JUN 2022 8 MAY 2022 Amends three chapters (7, 7, 13 and 16 13 and 16) to bring the plan into line with more contemporary and effective planning provisions. SCHEDULE 8 PAGE 13 OF 13 OFFICIAL